GUIDED IMAGERY CORPUS — 8 public-domain works, full text
The technique lineages: Ignatian composition of place (scene construction),
Coue autosuggestion (formula + repetition), pre-Jacobson relaxation,
concentration/visualization drills, imagery science (Galton), and New Thought
visualization (manifestation ancestry). All Project Gutenberg, public domain.

##############################################################################
## THE SPIRITUAL EXERCISES OF ST. IGNATIUS (retreat adaptation) — the original guided imagery method: "composition of place," multi-sensory scene construction, directed contemplation
##############################################################################

The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius




                              A. M. D. G.

                        THE SPIRITUAL EXERCISES
                                   OF
                              ST. IGNATIUS

                    ADAPTED TO AN EIGHT DAYS RETREAT

                                  AND

                              SIX TRIDUUMS

       In Preparation for The Semi-Annual Renovation of the Vows

                    All for the use of Jesuits only

                                   By
                       Rev. CHARLES COPPENS, S.J.


                               B. HERDER
                           17 South Broadway
                             St. Louis, Mo.
                                  1916




    Copyright, 1916
    by
    Joseph Gummersbach




             A RECOMMENDATION BY OUR REV. FATHER PROVINCIAL


Rev. Dear Father:


It gives me pleasure to say a few words in praise of the new book of Fr.
Charles Coppens on the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius. Any new
power that will help us to use these spiritual arms of St. Ignatius more
effectively deserves the hearty approval of every Jesuit. The volume is
intended for the use of Ours only, and will be found of great service in
conducting retreats or in giving the Triduums that take place twice a
year before the renovation of vows.

The customary meditations are well arranged, are solid, and at the same
time practical. The points are proposed very clearly so as to be readily
remembered.

I bespeak for this volume the good will of all of Ours, and trust it may
be of great help to a more effective giving of the exercises and be in
the hands of all.

    Yours sincerely in Christ,
    A. J. BURROWES, S.J.




                                PREFACE


The Text of the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius, as translated into
English from the Spanish Autograph, and edited for private circulation
by Rev. John Morris, S. J., is printed in a small volume of only 125
pages. That little work contains all that the Saint composed in the
Grotto of Manresa, and he never afterward wrote any additions to the
text. But in explaining his Exercises to his first companions, and to
others who made the retreat under his direction, he would adapt the
details to their characters and the various circumstances. His followers
did the same, without writing further additions or commentaries on the
original text; they followed in their practice the traditional method as
it had come to them from their saintly founder.

In the course of time, as was natural, considerable departures from the
first process took place, some of which induced the danger of gradually
losing the very spirit of the original Exercises. Among the learned men
of our Society who labored most successfully to check such tendency, one
of the most distinguished was the Father General John Roothaan, who in
1834 addressed a circular letter to all his subjects, earnestly warning
them against this peril. At the same time he furnished them a masterly
work on the original Spanish and Latin texts, which he accompanied with
a most valuable commentary.

For those preferring a Latin guide book, whether in making the Exercises
themselves, or in explaining them to others, no work is more commendable
than that masterpiece of Father Roothaan. Still, both before and since
its publication, many other editions of the Exercises and commentaries
on the same have been printed, both in Latin and in various modern
languages, with full approbation and warm commendations of the Superiors
of the Society; and excellent reasons appear to exist why successive
generations of Jesuits should continue their efforts to enrich this
valuable literature. In particular the eight days retreat, which all our
members perform every year, gains additional interest and impressiveness
when a wider range is presented, affording a choice among a large number
of approved guide books to direct them through this fertile region of
spirituality.

The spirit permeating all of these must ever be the same, so too the
main outline of the truths proposed and the general plan of the
Exercises. Yet experience shows that there remains a wide room for
variety in comments, suggestions and practical applications. Therefore,
when the time for each one’s annual retreat comes round, there is shown
by many Fathers an earnest desire for some late publication on the
subject, that will lend new zest to the familiar solid doctrine. To
satisfy such reasonable wishes is the chief reason why the present pages
are modestly presented to his brethren by

THE AUTHOR.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


THE RETREAT

Preface iii

Preparatory Consideration 1

FIRST DAY

First Meditation—End of Man 8

Second Meditation—End of Creatures 12

Consideration—End of the Religious Life 14

Third Meditation—Indifference to Creatures 20

SECOND DAY

First Meditation—Sin 26

Second Meditation—One’s Own Sins 30

Consideration—Confession of the Retreat 33

Third Meditation—Eternal Loss 37

THIRD DAY

First Meditation—Preparation for Death 42

Second Meditation—The Particular Judgment 44

Consideration—Purity of Conscience 48

Third Meditation—To Excite Perfect Contrition 53

FOURTH DAY

First Meditation—The Kingdom of Christ 57

Second Meditation—The Incarnation 60

Consideration—The Imitation of Christ 64

Third Meditation—The Birth of Christ 70

FIFTH DAY

First Meditation—The Flight Into Egypt 74

Second Meditation—The Private Life of Christ 77

Consideration—The Imitation of Christ’s Private Life 81

Third Meditation—The Public Life of Christ 87

SIXTH DAY

First Meditation—The Two Standards 91

Second Meditation—The Three Degrees of Humility 94

Consideration—Temptations 97

Third Meditation—Three Classes of Men 102

SEVENTH DAY

First Meditation—The Sufferings of Christ in the Garden 106

Second Meditation—Christ’s Sufferings Before His Judges 109

Consideration—Generosity in the Service of God 112

Third Meditation—The Death of Christ 118

EIGHTH DAY

First Meditation—The Resurrection of Christ 121

Second Meditation—Christ’s Ascension into Heaven 124

Consideration—The Spirit of Love 127

Third Meditation—Divine Love 133




                           INDEX TO TRIDUUMS


TRIDUUM A.

Meditation I—On the Desire of Perfection 138

Meditation II—In What Perfection Consists 140

Meditation III—Christ the Model of Perfection 143

Meditation IV—The Need of Prayer to Attain Perfection 145

Meditation V—The Power of Prayer to Obtain Perfection 148

Meditation VI—The Aid of Mary to Attain Perfection 150

TRIDUUM B.

Meditation I—On the Vows 153

Meditation II—On Renovation of the Vows 155

Meditation III—What Kind of Men Does Our Vocation Require? 157

Meditation IV—Christ Is Here to Help Us 160

Meditation V—The Holy Ghost Sanctifies Us 163

Meditation VI—Effects Produced by the Holy Ghost 165

TRIDUUM C.

Meditation I—The Need of Frequent Renovations of Spirit 169

Meditation II—Sin the Chief Hindrance to Our Progress 171

Meditation III—Fidelity in Little Things 174

Meditation IV—The Observance of Our Rules 177

Meditation V—Zeal for Souls 179

Meditation VI—Devotion to the Blessed Virgin 181

TRIDUUM D.

Meditation I—The Purpose of this Triduum 185

Meditation II—The Interior Spirit 187

Meditation III—The Interior Spirit Fostered by Faith 190

Meditation IV—The Interior Spirit Fostered by Hope 193

Meditation V—The Interior Spirit Fostered by Charity 195

Meditation VI—The Interior Spirit Fostered by the Holy Ghost 198

TRIDUUM E.

Meditation I—Preparation for the Triduum 201

Meditation II—The Field Ripe for the Harvest 203

Meditation III—Fraternal Charity 205

Meditation IV—The Spirit of Sacrifice 208

Meditation V—Become Men of Prayer 211

Meditation VI—The Vine and the Branches 214

TRIDUUM F.

Meditation I—On the Vows 217

Meditation II—The Vow of Chastity 219

Meditation III—The Vow of Obedience 222

Meditation IV—Strength of Character 225

Meditation V—Co-operation with Grace 227

Meditation VI—The Perfection of Our Actions 230




THE SPIRITUAL EXERCISES OF ST. IGNATIUS


                       PREPARATORY CONSIDERATION


                                   I


The days of the retreat are the most important in the year. 1. _The most
important for the Exercitant_; for his principal duty and highest
interest are the salvation and spiritual progress of his own soul: “Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and his justice, and all these things shall
be added unto you.” What would it profit any of us to convert even
thousands, if he loses his own soul? And if any one imagines that his
own salvation is already secured, and no longer needs his principal
care, he is a very ignorant or a conceited man.

2. _These days are the most important for the salvation of our
neighbor_; since, the more one becomes a man of God, as a good retreat
tends to make him, the better he will do the work of God. And the
salvation of souls is pre-eminently the work of God, not that of human
talent or industry.

3. _They are the most important for the glory of God_; since the glory
we render to God is in proportion to our holiness, the purity of our
intentions, the ardor of our love and our other virtues; the increase of
all of which is the direct purpose of the retreat.


                                   II


The yearly retreat is important for all religious, whatever be the
spiritual condition of their souls.

1. _Those who are leading fervent lives_ are likely to receive during it
special lights and graces enabling them to draw nearer to their Divine
Lord; _Amice, ascende superius_, “Friend, come up higher.” The Holy
Ghost is ever laboring at the sanctification of souls, of such
especially as show themselves deserving of peculiar love by their
faithful co-operation. Now this fidelity is most strikingly exhibited
when we abandon all earthly cares to devote our whole hearts to the
loving worship of the Lord, as we do in a retreat.

2. _Such souls as are gradually allowing their fervor to cool_ amidst
the distracting cares of an active life stand in special need of the
Spiritual Exercises, to arrest their downward course.

When one runs down a hill, his descent is accelerated by his own weight,
and he needs special help to avoid a serious fall. Such is the case of
those who are losing their fervor, and a good retreat provides the
remedy.

3. _If any have unfortunately already lost their balance_, and are
hurrying along to destruction by the commission of serious faults, or by
yielding to a no less dangerous tendency to tepidity, a good retreat is
almost the only way of saving them from ruin. In connection with these
thoughts it is well to reflect that some one of our annual retreats will
be our last; it may be the present one. Many of those who made the
retreat last year are now in eternity; and not a few of them saw no more
reason then to expect so early an end than we do now.


                                  III


It is very consoling for those who enter on these Spiritual Exercises to
remember that their efficacy for good is far greater than men are apt to
imagine; they are not merely human, but in some respects Divine; hence
their extraordinary power to sanctify us.

1. _These exercises are Divine in the truths they teach us_; for they
consist chiefly of meditations on the word of God; and the word of God
is the seed of salvation: _Semen est verbum Dei_. It is not the learning
of philosophers or scientists that brings us eternal life, but the
teachings of Christ; and these are the power working in the retreat.

2. _These Exercises are Divine in the principal director_ who conducts
them; for in them the Spirit of God instructs and enlightens the soul of
the exercitant and sanctifies it. The printed page containing these
teachings, or the Father Master who explains them is not the chief power
at work during the retreat, no more than the audible voice of Christ
converted and sanctified the souls of His hearers. God speaks to our
heart in the retreat, saying, “Hear, O my people, and I will speak.... I
am God, thy God” (Ps. 49).

3. Not only the several truths considered during these days are the word
of God, but the _whole plan of these Spiritual Exercises is in a true
sense Divine_. For no one who is familiar with the facts of St.
Ignatius’ life can believe that he had acquired, at the time when he
produced this masterpiece of sacred wisdom, such knowledge of the
spiritual life as it exhibits on every page. When he came to Manresa, he
was a mere novice in spirituality. And in fact he himself always felt
convinced that he owed these Exercises to Divine illumination. Thus, as
Bartoli relates, “on one occasion the Saint confessed to Father Laynez
that one hour of prayer at Manresa had taught him more concerning
spiritual things than he could have learned from the instructions of the
wisest doctors” (Life, I. p. 57).

The object which this unique book has accomplished was to reduce the
direction of soul to a science, that bases on certain principles of
faith an exact and positive method, which, guided by the rules
prescribed, insures almost infallible success. Considering the
circumstances in which it was written we cannot but attribute this work
to superhuman aid. Hence its wonderful efficiency, testified to by
countless witnesses, and continued in the experience of three centuries
till the present day.


                                   IV


Hence the _high esteem in which these Spiritual Exercises are held_ by
the best judges in such matters. For instance, when the learned Pope Leo
XIII wished to select the best means by which he might prepare himself
and his domestic prelates to gain the plenary indulgence of the jubilee
year 1900, he had two of our Fathers conduct in his palace the Exercises
of the retreat; and, at his advanced age of over 90 years, he attended
in person nearly all the meditations. His successor, Pope Pius X, gave
similar marks of his esteem for these Exercises. There exists in our
society a venerable tradition, which seems to date back to the earliest
years of the Institute, to the effect that St. Ignatius was specially
assisted by the Blessed Mother of God in composing his unique
masterpiece. The inhabitants of Manresa, some years after his death,
embodied this tradition in a beautiful painting, which they placed in
the cave, representing him as kneeling before the figure of the Blessed
Mother and Child, with his eyes fixed upon her lips, and his right hand
extended as if ready to write what she dictated to him.

Father Henry Watrigant, S. J., relates that this tradition has been
confirmed at various times by well authenticated revelations. Thus he
says: “The venerable Father Louis de Ponte narrates that, when in the
year 1600 Ours entered on their annual retreat, his penitent, the
venerable Marina de Escobar, also began her retreat; and the Archangel
Gabriel appeared to her and said that the Blessed Virgin Mary had been
as it were the foundress of those Exercises, having instructed St.
Ignatius to put them in that form.”


                                   V


Having now understood what efficiency is attached to a good retreat, we
naturally ask ourselves _what we must do to secure these precious
results_. We must:

1. Enter seriously into that deep recollection which is the proper
atmosphere for a retreat, avoiding during it all unnecessary intercourse
with the outside world.

“God and I” should be the only objects of my thoughts; all else is a
hindrance to perfect success.

2. We must diligently apply our mental powers to master the truths
proposed to us; for that purpose St. Ignatius bids us occupy ourselves
during a full hour in each of the meditations or contemplations
assigned. He adds that, “in time of desolation, the exercitant, in order
to go against the desolation, and to overcome the temptation, must
always remain a short time beyond the full hour, so as to accustom
himself, not only to resist the enemy, but even to overthrow him” (Ann.
13).

3. In the 5th Annotation the Saint says: “It will much benefit him who
is receiving the Exercises to enter upon them with a large heart and
with liberality towards the Creator and Lord, offering all his desires
and liberty to Him, in order that His Divine Majesty may make use of his
person and of all he possesses according to His most holy will.” He says
elsewhere: “The more liberal one shall show himself towards God, the
more liberal he shall find God towards him, and the more fit he shall
daily be to receive in greater abundance His graces and spiritual gifts”
(Rule 19).

4. Both during the meditations and at all other times of prayer, great
fervor should be employed to obtain from the Lord those copious graces
which He has in store for us, and which He desires to bestow; but it is
a general law of His providence that they must be eagerly asked for, and
to the best of our power deserved by our efforts and co-operation.

If these means are diligently employed, we can indulge a quiet
confidence of great results; for the Lord does not invite us to a rich
banquet without providing for the full satisfaction of His guests.




                             THE FIRST DAY


The first day of the retreat is mainly devoted to what St. Ignatius
calls “_The Principle and Foundation_.”

Christ bids us act like “a wise man that built his house upon a
rock,—and it fell not because it was founded on a rock” (St. Matth. vii,
24). The truth now considered is the rock on which the whole structure
of our spirituality is to be built. Bartoli, in his life of St.
Ignatius, narrates that a learned Doctor of the University of Paris,
Martin Olave, used to say that one single hour spent in meditating on
this foundation had taught him more than long years of theological
studies. Such too has been the experience of many others. Father Everard
Mercurian spoke of this foundation as alone sufficient to effect the
most astonishing changes in a soul, by uprooting all its earthly
affections and directing its desires to God alone.




                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
                           On the End of Man


The first part of the Foundation is: “_Man was created to praise,
reverence and serve God our Lord, and by this means to save his soul._”

To begin any of our meditations well, St. Ignatius bids us stand, for
the space of a _Pater Noster_, one or two paces from the place at which
we are to meditate, and with our mind raised on high, consider how God
looks down upon us, and then adore Him with an act of reverence and
self-humiliation.

Then follows the _Preparatory Prayer_, which is also the same for all
the meditations. It is to ask our Lord for grace that all the acts of
our memory, our understanding and our will may throughout the meditation
tend directly to the service and praise of the Divine Majesty.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine your Blessed Saviour appears before you, looking
lovingly on you and saying: “My son, I am now going to teach you the
first truth in the spiritual life.”

_2nd Prelude._ Beg that you may understand this truth as the Saints have
understood it.

_POINT I._ Consider the words, “_Man was created._”

1. “_Man._” What is man? Compared to God, man is a mere nothing, like a
little gnat flitting in the sunshine; yet among material things man is a
masterpiece, endowed with the most wonderful powers and potentialities.
Man is like a musical instrument, from which the Divine Spirit can draw
the most exquisite harmony, as He has done from millions of saintly
souls. But if not responsive to His touch, it gives out harsh and false
sounds, marring the harmony of God’s world. A man may live like an
Angel, or like a demon or like a brute animal.

2. Man was “_created_,” that is, made out of nothing, for so was the
world; now even a savage understands that the thing made belongs to the
maker. Therefore I belong to God; He can do with me and require of me
what He pleases.

_POINT II._ Consider what God requires of man. If God has made man for a
purpose, He certainly requires of him to work for that purpose. But God
can do nothing without a purpose, a purpose worthy of Himself; His
wisdom requires that. Now He alone is worthy of Himself; therefore He
directed all things to Himself, as the Book of Proverbs says: “The Lord
hath made all things for Himself” (xvi, 4).

It is not that God needs any creature; for being all perfect He is
self-sufficient; but right order requires that He make all His creatures
tend to Him.

How then must all creatures tend to God? By glorifying Him; that is by
_praising, reverencing and serving God_.

1. _Praising God._ To praise God is to show forth and proclaim His
excellence. The Psalms are full of such praises; for instance Psalm 116:
“Praise the Lord, all ye nations, praise Him all ye people.” We must not
live then to exalt ourselves, or to get others to praise us, but render
all honor to God, to whom it all belongs.

2. _Reverencing God_, worshipping Him, as we do when we pray. Thus the
Angels in Heaven ever do, crying out; “Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
Almighty” (Ap. iv, 8). Thus we put statues of Angels on the altar to
express our reverence for the Blessed Sacrament. Thus we should express
our reverence for God whenever we speak to Him in prayer. How do I pray
habitually? With what reverence of bodily posture and of mental
attitude? We should thus make our meditations practical.

3. _Serving God._ To serve another is to do his bidding; we are then
created to be ever at the disposal of God, to obey Him whenever He makes
known His will: “If you love me, keep my commandments,” He says.

_POINT III._ Consider the further consequences of our praise, reverence
and service of God; “_And by these means to save his soul_,” that is to
attain eternal happiness.

The good God has so wisely and bountifully ordained all things that by
glorifying Him we glorify ourselves and reach the fulfilment of all our
desires. But by refusing to glorify Him we degrade and utterly ruin
ourselves.

Now we are made free to do the one or the other. This freedom is a
wonderful gift, a glorious gift in one way, making us like to God and
capable of securing our own bliss forever, with God’s grace, of course:
but on the other hand putting on us a terrible responsibility. No other
power on earth can control a man’s liberty. When St. Agnes, a mere child
of 13 years, refused to do wrong, the whole power of the Roman Empire
could not bend her will; on the other hand, the influence of the holiest
education cannot make a child virtuous without its free co-operation.

Can a man then, by refusing to serve God, deprive the Creator of the
glory that he was intended to render Him? Certainly not; but he can
freely choose to glorify the goodness of God by faithful service, thus
securing at the same time perfect happiness for himself, or choose to
glorify God’s justice by his eternal punishment.

_Colloquy_ with God Almighty, my Creator, and with Christ, my Redeemer;
that I may do my full duty and secure eternal bliss.


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                        On the End of Creatures


The second part of the foundation says: “_And the other things upon the
face of the earth were created for man, and to help him to attain the
end for which he was created. Whence it follows that man must make use
of them in so far as they help him to attain his end; and in the same
way he ought to withdraw himself from them in so far as they hinder him
from it._”

The task of the exercitant is three-fold:

1. Intellectual: he must strive to understand the truths proposed
correctly, clearly and fully;

2. Practical: he must apply the truths to his own conduct;

3. Prayerful: so as to obtain aid from Heaven to succeed in both these
respects.

_The Preparatory Prayer_ is the same as in the first meditation. It is
so too in all the following meditations. It will not be necessary to
remind the exercitant of this in the subsequent exercises.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold our Dear Lord before you, who says:
“My son, I will now teach you the second truth of the spiritual life.”

_2nd Prelude._ Grant, O Dear Lord, that I may understand it fully and
learn from it how to improve my conduct.

_POINT I._ Consider these words: “_The other things upon the face of the
earth are created for man_:” and man for God. Here is a clear exhibition
of God’s wisdom; the inanimate is for the vegetable world, the vegetable
for the animal, and all for man; inferior things are for the real good
of superior ones. I am not then created for material enjoyment: _Ad
majora natus sum_, “I am born for greater things,” I must not degrade
myself by the perverse gratification of my animal nature.

_POINT II._ Consider the words: “_And in order to attain the end for
which he was created_.” How do the other things aid man to attain his
end? In various ways.

Some things need only be considered to raise man’s heart to God and
prompt him to reverence the Divine Majesty. “The heavens show forth the
glory of God, and the firmament declares the work of his hands,” etc.
(Ps. 18).

Other creatures are for the use of man, as food, drink, clothing, etc.
Others are to be endured, that he may practise submission to God’s holy
will; such as excessive heat and cold, sickness, death, etc. Others are
to be abstained from, as was the forbidden fruit in Paradise.

Everything thus becomes for man a stepping stone to Heaven.

_POINT III._ “_Whence it follows that man must make use of them in so
far as they help him to attain his end; and in the same way he ought to
withdraw himself from them in as far as they hinder him from it._”

Consider how this rule may be observed or violated. For instance, (a) In
our use of food and drink. The relish attached to the use of them is
good as a means to promote our health; but under its influence excess is
often committed, by which health may be injured, disease contracted and
life shortened. Am I always blameless in this respect?

(b) Sleep may be excessive and lead to the neglect of duty.

(c) The study of nature, of the sciences and the fine arts may greatly
promote the glory of God and indirectly the good of souls, and it may be
wrong to neglect it; but it may also be abused; it is only a means, and
must not be made an end in itself, to the neglect of our true end.

(d) Such too is the reading of literature or of the news of the day.

(e) Such is our intercourse with superiors, our brethren and outsiders.
The bee gathers honey, the spider poison from the same plant.

_Colloquy_, asking grace to use all things wisely.


                             CONSIDERATION
                    On the End of the Religious Life


                                   I


When we consider the conduct of men generally, we see at a glance that
the lives of vast numbers of them are not in conformity with the truths
we have been studying; and we are reminded of the words of Christ: “Wide
is the gate and broad the way that leadeth to destruction, and many
there are that go in thereat. How narrow is the gate and straight the
way that leadeth to life, and few there are that find it” (St. Matth.
vii, 13, 14). Of course the way of salvation, owing to His preaching and
His merits, is now much wider than when He spoke those words; but yet it
appears to be, through men’s own fault, much narrower than it should be.
What is the condition of religious in this respect? It is well worth
while to examine what is the effect of our religious vocation on the
most important of all our interests, the attaining of the end for which
we were created. Now it is clear that the religious life offers many
great advantages for that purpose.

1. We are created to _praise, reverence and serve_ God. Now the
religious life is entirely directed to these objects. 1. We are
constantly employed in the promotion of the _praise_ and glory of God:
all our labors are directed to it; the place we live in, the occupations
assigned us and all the circumstances of them are selected with a view
of this purpose.

2. The _reverence_ shown to God is continually fostered by a long
succession of common and private prayers, Holy Masses, recitation of the
Divine Office, visits to the Blessed Sacrament, etc., from morning till
night, day after day, year after year, till death.

3. The _service_ of God, the accomplishment of His holy will, is not
confined to the observance of His Commandments and those of His Church;
but, by adding the rules of the Order, the will of God is made known and
accomplished in all the details of life.

Thus the religious is constantly occupied with the praise, reverence and
service of God. His heart is not divided between different objects of
his love: “He that is without a wife,” says St. Paul, “is solicitous for
the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please God; but he that
is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife; and he is divided” (I Cor. vii, 32, 33).

The condition of mind in religious is _like that of the Blessed Angels_,
who are busy with God and the things of God. It is _like that of the
Holy Family_ while it abode on earth; so that a religious house is a
copy of the Holy House of Nazareth.

And all this is not to last for a little while only, but for a whole
lifetime; for the religious vows give stability and permanence for all
years to come.

Therefore this sacrifice is compared by theologians to _a holocaust_,
the most perfect of the ancient sacrifices, in which, namely, the whole
victim was consumed in the fire. Thus one religious is likely to do more
than a number of seculars for the praise and reverence and service of
God.


                                   II


_And by these means the religious easily saves his soul_, thus attaining
the second end for which he was created. The good Lord has promised this
in so many words. For he said: “Every one that hath left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my sake, shall receive a hundred fold and shall possess life
everlasting” (St. Matth. xix, 29).

The hundred fold mentioned in this promise is not to be passed over
lightly. For although it constitutes no portion of the eternal life of
which we are speaking, still it is intimately connected with it. For it
embraces a multitude of heavenly graces: a Divine protection in dangers,
a peace of soul that the world cannot give; all of which make the
attainment of eternal life far more easy than it usually is outside of
the religious state.

With this prospect of eternal bliss for ourselves is united the special
efficiency which the good Lord deigns to bestow on religious to procure
the salvation of many souls. True, the exercise of the sacred ministry,
with the sacramental power, is the ordinary channel of sanctification
established by Christ in His Church; but there is a special efficiency
in personal virtue to bring souls nearer to God; and the direct purpose
and effect of the religious life is to increase personal holiness. The
archenemy of man knows well who are the most successful in saving souls,
and those he opposes with all his power. The fact that religious are
more fiercely hated and opposed by the enemies of God, clearly shows
that they produce more fruit in souls.


                                  III


Of course the religious life has its hardships, it is _a life of
sacrifice_; but that is its honor and its recommendation to a noble
soul: “The kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it
away” (St. Matth. xi, 12). All the Saints have led lives of sacrifice,
like their Divine Master: “Jesus said to His disciples: If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow
me” (Ib. xvi, 24).

To aid us in carrying the cross of the religious life cheerfully, let us
reflect what _magnificent prizes_ are held out to us.

1. There is the bright _crown of virginity_, with the distinguished
privilege of more intimate union with Jesus in Heaven. “These are they
who were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These follow the
Lamb whithersoever He goeth” (Apoc. xiv, 4).

2. There is also the glory of being seated, with Christ, on the
_judgment seat_, when He will come in His Majesty on the clouds of
heaven: they are to judge the world, rather than to be judged. Thus at
least the Venerable Bede explains the promise made by Christ to His
Apostles, which for a parity of reason, he extends to religious: “Amen I
say to you that you who have followed me, in the regeneration, when the
Son of Man shall sit on the seat of His Majesty, you also shall sit on
twelve seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel” (St. Matth. xix, 28).

3. Another most valuable advantage of the religious life lies in the
_protection_ it affords against dangerous temptations to sin. True, as
long as we live upon earth we may fall from grace, and forfeit, through
our own grievous fault, the rich store of merit so far accumulated and
our right to eternal bliss: “He that thinketh himself to stand, let him
take heed lest he fall,” writes the Apostle (I Cor. x, 12). The best a
man can do is to surround himself with such securities as lessen the
assaults from without and strengthen the will within him. And such is
undoubtedly the religious life. Its vows of poverty, chastity and
obedience cut off the fiercest assaults of man’s triple enemy, the
world, the Devil and the flesh; and its constant practices of piety and
mortification provide a copious supply of Heavenly assistance to resist
temptations.

Therefore _St. Bernard draws this consoling picture_ of religion: “It is
a state,” he says, “in which man lives with more purity, falls more
rarely, rises more promptly, walks more securely, is more frequently
bedewed with celestial graces, sleeps more peaceably, dies with more
assurance, passes more quickly through Purgatory, and is more richly
rewarded.”


                                   IV


However, we must bear in mind that membership of a religious Order does
not necessarily secure all those advantages, and that in the same Order
they are _obtained by different persons in very different degrees_. The
chief requisite to obtain them is to be a fervent religious. The more
generous one shall show himself to God, says St. Ignatius, the more
generous he shall find God towards him, and the more fit shall he daily
be to receive in greater abundance His graces and spiritual gifts. The
rapidity of our spiritual progress is not like that of travellers in a
ship on the sea, all of whom advance at the same rate, whether they are
walking or sitting or lying down; but our progress is like that of men
travelling on a highroad, each of whom has his own rate of advancement
according to his own efforts.

Thus St. Aloysius, St. Stanislaus and St. John Berchmans advanced
further in a few months than most religious do in many years.

While we have perhaps broken strong bonds in tearing ourselves away from
home and kindred, let us not be attached to little things; a slender
silken thread is enough to keep a bird from gaining its liberty, and
thus a little trifle may prevent us from soaring aloft to higher regions
of sanctity. God fully deserves the love of our whole hearts, which are
too small to be divided between Him and the things of earth.

Let us examine ourselves during this retreat, and see whether we are
drawing all the profit we should from the rich treasury of our religious
vocation.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                      On Indifference to Creatures


The third part of the Foundation: “_It is therefore necessary that we
should make ourselves indifferent to all created things, in so far as it
is left to the liberty of our free will to do so, and is not forbidden;
in such sort that we do not for our part wish for health rather than
sickness, for wealth instead of poverty, for honor rather than dishonor,
for a long life rather than a short one, and so in all other things,
desiring and choosing only that which most leads us to the end for which
we were created._”

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see bright Angels standing before the throne
of God, waiting to be assigned as guardians to new-born infants; they
are perfectly indifferent to take charge of rich or poor children in any
part of the world.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for a like spirit of perfect indifference to all
creatures, caring for God alone and His holy will.

_POINT I._ Let me ask myself sincerely: am I now fully convinced that I
am in this world for no other end than to praise, reverence and serve
God, and thereby to save my soul? that I must use creatures only in as
far as they conduce to this end? This is right and just, it is highly
useful for me; it is necessary, the one thing necessary;—all else is
vanity; it passes away in a short time.

              “The world’s a stage, and men are only players,
              They have their exits and their entrances.”

_POINT II._ What prevents me from always living up to that conviction?
The reason is that I allow myself to be influenced by various
predilections and aversions, by my likes and dislikes for certain
things. If I were perfectly indifferent, as the Angels are, whose will
has perfect control over all their affections, then I would choose on
all occasions only what God wills, as far as His will would be known to
me. Can I acquire such an indifference? I cannot help feeling an
inclination to like or dislike certain things; for it is an effect of
the fall of man that our passions often rebel against the spirit. But I
can control these promptings to a great extent, and with God’s grace,
acquire considerable power over their movements.

To strengthen this habit of control over my various inclinations is the
purpose of the present meditation: that is meant by making myself
indifferent to all created things.

And still St. Ignatius wisely adds: “In as far as they are allowed me
and not forbidden”; lest the uninstructed might imagine that they might
lawfully allow disorderly sentiments to arise within them without at
once driving them away.

How can I make myself indifferent? By considering the evils connected
with the things to which I am inclined, and the good to be derived from
those disliked.

_POINT III._ Let me consider in detail some principal objects to which a
man is not naturally indifferent, but he may with God’s grace make
himself so.

1. _A long life or a short life._ For all I know, my eternal salvation
may be much better secured if I should die soon than if I live yet many
years. It was so with many persons, who were holy in their youth and
were afterwards perverted. Therefore the Book of Wisdom says: “He
pleased God and was beloved, and living among sinners he was translated.
He was taken away lest wickedness should alter his understanding and
deceit beguile his soul” (iv, 10, 11). What a blessing it would have
been for a Luther or a Henry VIII to have died young. As I do not know
what is best for me, I ought in all reason to leave it all to God’s
disposal, and make myself indifferent to a long life or a short life.

2. _Health or sickness._ In comparison with the salvation of my soul the
enjoyment of health during this life is of slight importance; and common
sense would bid me readily to resign the latter to secure the former.
Now God alone knows when this is necessary. We read of a virtuous man in
England, who made a pilgrimage to the tomb of St. Thomas a’ Becket to be
cured from blindness. He was heard, and returned rejoicing to his home.
But he found soon after that the free use of his sight led him into many
new temptations. So he returned to the same shrine and begged the Saint
that, if it were for his greater spiritual good to be deprived of sight,
this might be done rather than that he should fall into mortal sin. The
Lord worked this second miracle to show what was really best for him.

3. _Riches or poverty._ The young man whom the Saviour invited to sell
all and give to the poor and then follow Him had not the courage to
answer the call, because he was very rich. And Jesus remarked it was
difficult for a rich man to save his soul. It is then very wise not to
care for riches, but to make one’s self indifferent on this point.

4. _Honor rather than dishonor._ History is full of examples of men who
were virtuous while in an humble station, and who, after being raised to
honors, became proud; now a proud man is odious in the sight of God.

5. _And so of all other things._ Let me ask myself whether there is any
point on which I am not indifferent, and then consider how I may bend my
mind in the opposite direction; then pray earnestly to our Lord and His
Holy Mother to gain indifference to all created things.

_POINT IV._ Let me consider what will be the good effects of attaining
such indifference. They will be:

1. Considerable increase in virtue; for thus my will becomes conformable
to the will of God: I thus practise faith in His providence, and
confidence in His paternal care of me.

2. Security from many dangers of sin, to which I should have been
exposed if I had persisted in controlling my own fortunes.

3. Quiet of mind in the happy thought that God, to whom I abandon myself
entirely, will dispose all for the best: “For we know that to them that
love God all things work together unto good” (Rom. viii, 28). “Cast thy
care upon the Lord, and He shall sustain thee” (Ps. 54). “My children,
behold the generations of men, and know ye that no one hath hoped in the
Lord, and hath been confounded” (Ecclus. ii, 11).

On the other hand those who are not indifferent to the things of earth
live in constant agitation of mind, restless in the pursuit of fancied
blessings, and disappointed when they fail to obtain them; and, what is
still worse, frequently exposed to the danger of sin, sometimes of
grievous sin, in their eagerness to obtain their desires, or in their
reluctance to do their duty.

_Colloquy._ Pray earnestly, both during the meditation, when proper
desires are aroused in your heart, and especially at the conclusion of
the meditation, that you may totally detach your affections from all
things created, and obtain the grace of indifference to all creatures.




                             THE SECOND DAY


We have now fully understood the end, or purpose, of our creation, which
is to praise, reverence and serve God and thereby save our souls. We
must next consider what will be the result if we freely refuse to live
for that end, and prefer to do our own will in opposition to the will of
God. The Lord is not going to prevent us from doing so; He will not
interfere with the exercise of our free will. Were a child, in the
fervor of its first Communion, most earnestly to beseech God to let it
die young rather than live to commit a mortal sin, He would no doubt
give it additional graces to avoid sin, but He will not control the
child’s freedom. Every one of us must carve out his own future by his
own free choice. We know what we have to do to make that future
sovereignly happy; and we are now to consider prayerfully what evils
threaten us if we refuse to do it. For this purpose we will now study
certain historical facts, and see how other persons have fared.


                            FIRST MEDITATION
                                 On Sin


This exercise affords a favorable opportunity to explain the ordinary
process of meditation, which consists in applying to a chosen subject
our three intellectual faculties, the memory, the understanding and the
will, as shall now be shown in detail.

_Preparatory prayer_, as usual.

_1st Prelude._ Let me imagine I behold the scene which Christ described
saying: “I saw Satan like lightning falling from heaven” (St. Luke x,
18).

_2nd Prelude._ I ask the grace to understand how severely God has
punished the sins of others, so that I may conceive an intense dread and
horror of sin, especially of my own sins.

_POINT I._ Consider the first sin we know of, that by which the angels
fell. Apply to it: 1. The _memory_, recalling the facts. They were
created by the same Lord that made me, and for the same end, to praise,
reverence and serve Him, and by this means to attain eternal bliss.
They, like me, were put to a trial of their obedience; they were free to
serve or no, as they chose.

A multitude of the angels refused to obey: they sinned. These were cast
out of Heaven into Hell, and punished with the direst woe forever.

2. _The understanding_ takes in the striking points of analogy between
their history and that of man: If they were so severely punished, what
must man expect when he imitates their rebellion? What a dreadful evil
sin must be, since a good and just God hates it so. Their great number
did not save the angels, nor will the number of bad men be a protection;
all men are like a little dust before the infinite God. Man’s excellence
is below that of the angels, in power, in knowledge and in all natural
gifts. They sinned but once; perhaps I have sinned repeatedly. What must
I think of myself? of my past? of my future?

3. _My will_ is gradually moved by these and similar considerations to
detest sin, to dread sin, to detest myself if I have sinned, to beg God
to spare me. I must stir up my will to hate sin more and more, to
protest to God my hatred of it, my self-reproach: “Spare me, Oh Lord,
according to the multitude of thy mercies.”

_POINT II._ Consider the sin of our first parents. 1. _My memory_
recalls the facts. They were created by the same God and for the same
end as I; they were loved by Him and placed in a garden of delights, in
Paradise, destined to enjoy the vision of God forever. They were free.
God allowed Satan to tempt them, as He allows him to tempt me: “The
serpent said to the woman: No, you shall not die the death. For God doth
know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be
opened and you shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. And the woman
saw that the tree was good, and delightful to behold: and she took of
the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave to her husband, who did eat”
(Gen. iii, 4-6). They were in consequence cast out of Paradise,
condemned to more than nine hundred years of toil and suffering, and to
death, and all the evils that have befallen them and their posterity
have been the punishment of sin.

2. _My understanding_ must weigh these facts and reason on them, so as
to realize the boundless evil of rebelling against our sovereign Lord
and Master. It is not only the words of God but even more His deeds that
show us what He is and how He acts. His severity in punishing sin in
creatures for which He had shown such generous love exhibits the utter
abomination He has for moral evil.

3. I must stir up _my will_ to detest that same evil, to dread my own
weakness which exposes me to sin again, to regret my past offenses, and
to form strong resolutions for the future, praying earnestly for God’s
help.

_POINT III._ St. Ignatius bids us consider a third sin, namely that of
some person who has gone to Hell for one mortal offense. St. Liguori, in
his little book “On the Commandments and Sacraments,” narrates a number
of what he calls “Melancholic Examples,” of persons who appeared after
death, and said they were damned for some one or more mortal sins which
they had not properly confessed. One is the case of a woman, who had
been reputed to be very devout, so much so that after her death her body
had been treated with the greatest veneration. But the day after her
burial she appeared to the Bishop of the place as if laid on a blazing
fire, and she told him that she was damned on account of a mortal sin of
thought she had concealed in confession.

1. _The memory_ must recall the facts; it matters not whether they are
well authenticated or not, since the doctrine is certain that one mortal
sin unpardoned is enough to damn the soul.

2. _The understanding_ reasons on the case, so as to realize vividly the
sad results of dying in sin.

3. _The will_ is thus stirred up to hate sin as the greatest of all
evils, and to avoid it at any sacrifice, according to the warning of
Christ: “If thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it from
thee. For it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should
perish, rather than thy whole body be cast into hell” (St. Matth. v,
29).

_Colloquy_ with Jesus dying for my sins upon the Cross, begging for
grace to repent of all past sins, and to make strong resolutions against
future offenses.


                           SECOND MEDITATION
                           On One’s Own Sins


It is well to remark here that, 1. The fact that St. Peter was forgiven
did not prevent him from mourning for his sin all the rest of his life;
2. Many persons repine excessively under afflictions because they forget
that they have deserved much worse by their sins; 3. The Saints
mortified themselves severely for small faults; 4. This meditation is
congenial to humble souls, like the Publican, but painful to the
Pharisee; 5. The least we can do is to detest our sins heartily and to
atone for them.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you stand before God like the humble Publican,
saying: “O God, have mercy on me, a sinner.”

_2nd Prelude._ Beg for an intense grief and confusion for your sins.

_POINT I._ Briefly recall to memory the series of your sins, from your
early years, through childhood, boyhood, youth, through subsequent
periods of your life, noticing successive places of abode, various
occupations, companions, etc.

_POINT II._ Study to understand the evil of your sins, considering:

1. _Every species of sin has its own peculiar vileness_; for instance,
lying is so odious that its very name is offensive, stealing is still
worse, so that one caught in a theft is disgraced for life, gluttony is
disgraceful, pride is odious to God and man, envy is mean, profanity is
provoking to the great and holy God, deceit is despicable, vanity is
ridiculous, impurity lowers a man beneath the brute, etc.

2. _Every sin is an insult to God._ When a person insults his equal, he
incurs his displeasure and deserves punishment; more so when he insults
his superior; and the offense is the greater in proportion as the party
insulted is more distinguished and the offender lower in comparison. Now
consider how great is God, who is insulted, compared to man, who insults
Him:

a. The meanness of man. What is one man compared to a thousand men, to a
thousand thousand, or million men? Like a little gnat flitting in the
sunshine. And what are a million men compared to the one thousand five
hundred millions of men now inhabiting the earth? And what are all these
together compared to all the former and the future generations? And what
are all men compared to the Angels of God?

And what are all creatures compared to the Creator Himself? Less than a
drop of water compared to the vast ocean. What then am I compared to
God? And yet, if I have ever sinned, I have put myself above God, my
will above His will. If then I have often sinned, what punishment have I
not deserved?

b. See the meanness of the body of man, which corrupts all it uses, and
needs constant care to keep it from becoming insupportable, even to
itself. See how death degrades it, how even sickness degrades it. And
the soul of man: see how it is ever inclined to conceive and foster evil
thoughts and desires, how it prompts to evil words and actions; so that
St. Ignatius, who had been a proud soldier, when he came to know himself
better, looked on himself as a running ulcer flowing with corruption.
And yet in sinning, this vile being, man, rises up to insult God.

c. On the other hand consider the greatness of God, by comparison with
the littleness of man: compare His power with man’s weakness, His
knowledge with man’s ignorance, His eternity with man’s short span of
life, His bounty with man’s selfishness, etc.

_POINT III._ I will arouse my will to detest my sinfulness, indignant
against myself, and wondering that God continues to bear with me, to
favor me, to have His Angels protect me, the earth support me; and He
forbids all men to injure me, commands them to love me.

_Colloquy_ with my crucified Lord, begging His mercy and His pardon.


                             CONSIDERATION
                    On the Confession of the Retreat


The direct purpose of the first days of the retreat is to purify the
soul of all guilt of sin and all attachment to sin. For this purpose the
Sacrament of Penance is the most efficient means, and the confession of
sins is an integral part of the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius.


                                   I


_Confession may be of three kinds_: a general confession of one’s whole
life, or a considerable portion of one’s life; the ordinary, or weekly
confession; and thirdly the annual or semi-annual review, which is of
rule in many religious institutions.

1. _A general confession_ is obligatory if the preceding confessions
have been badly made; it is useful at the age when a child has been
fully instructed in its religious duties; when a person enters on a
permanent state of life, and perhaps once more, when one approaches the
portals of eternity. The anxiety entertained by some souls to repeat
their general confessions over and over again is most unreasonable; it
fosters scrupulosity and is injurious to spiritual progress.

2. _In the ordinary, or weekly, confessions_, which, in the case of
religious, rarely include a mortal sin, earnest care must be taken that
one or more real sins, recently or formerly committed, be confessed, so
that matter be presented for absolution; and also that there be elicited
an act of supernatural contrition for those sins, or at least for some
one of them. Else the Sacrament would be invalid, for real supernatural
contrition is one of its essential parts.

3. _An annual or semi-annual review_ of the weekly confessions affords
marked advantages, especially when it is made during the retreat: a.
Faults are thus likely to be noticed which attracted little attention at
other times. As when a ray of sunshine enters into a rather dark room,
and reveals more dust on the furniture than was noticed before, so the
Divine light of grace, entering the soul during the Exercises, discovers
various defects of which there had been no clear perception. That is a
good occasion to obtain pardon for them.

b. When our faults are thus seen together, they are apt to arouse more
contrition, and thus secure more entire pardon.

c. Such a review gives us a clearer knowledge of ourselves and shows us
what defects we should chiefly labor to correct.


                                   II


_To prepare for such a review_, we should consider those sins especially
which are more likely to be committed by religious. In mentioning them
we shall follow the order of the Decalogue.

_The First Commandment_ regards the worship of God. Under this head come
wilful distractions or negligences in prayer, which may spoil
considerable parts of our spiritual exercises; disrespectful handling of
holy things, and the unworthy reception of the Sacraments. This last sin
is of course rare among religious, but very grievous if it should occur;
for it bears the guilt of sacrilege.

_The Second Commandment_ requires the observance of our vows. The vow of
poverty is violated when a religious disposes of any temporal goods
without permission of his superior, acting as if it were his own
property. That of chastity attaches to the violation of the sixth and
ninth commandments the additional guilt of sacrilege. The vow of
obedience is violated when a religious refuses or neglects to do what he
is commanded to do under obedience, or does what he is thus forbidden.

_The Third Commandment_ is not likely to be violated by religious.

_The Fourth Commandment_ obliges subjects to reverence and obey their
superiors when they mean to impose an obligation of conscience; and they
must be supposed to mean it when the good of souls or the glory of God
requires them thus to use their authority. A precept of obedience in
virtue of the vow is rarely imposed; but commands in matters of some
importance derive from the natural law power to oblige any subjects to
obey their lawful superiors, independently of any vow. If serious
consequences are likely to follow from the violation of the command, the
sin may be grievous.

_The Fifth Commandment_ says: “Thou shalt not kill,” and forbids all
wilful injury to another’s or to one’s own body. Of course religious are
not likely to injure others violently; but this commandment may be
violated in many other ways. One may neglect his own health or injure it
by indiscretion in the use of food and drink, thus bringing on diseases
by which many a life is shortened. A superior or an infirmarian may
neglect the proper care of sick or delicate persons, a pastor or teacher
that of school children, etc. Injury done to the souls of others by
scandal, or bad example, may also be considered under this commandment;
and there are very many ways of giving scandal.

The Fifth Commandment also forbids quarrelling, unreasonable anger,
hatred and revenge. A religious teacher, for instance, must be careful
that, when obliged to punish children, he does not allow himself to be
prompted by passion; and revenge is totally opposed to the spirit of
Christ.

_The Sixth Commandment_ forbids any act of impurity wilfully committed;
and it has this peculiarity that it admits of no slight matter, but the
sin is always grievous when the impure pleasure is sought or admitted
with full knowledge and full consent.

_The Seventh Commandment_ forbids stealing and all injustice done to
others in their material possessions. The religious state is a strong
protection against these sins; still it does not make them impossible.
It may happen that a religious does not fulfill all the conditions of a
contract; as for instance, when a teacher neglects his class or some of
his pupils, so that these do not really get the value of the tuition
charges.

_The Eighth Commandment_ enjoins both truthfulness and regard for
another’s good name. A lie is never allowed, and mental reservations
must not be used but for good reasons, lest human intercourse lose the
charm and security of mutual confidence.

Any lessening of another’s good name without sufficient reason is
sinful, and it is doubly so when the accusation is false; even a rash
judgment or suspicion is wrong, yet it may be mistaken without being
rash. The great rule is: “See thou never do to another what thou wouldst
hate to have done to thee by another” (Tob. iv, 16).

_The Ninth and Tenth Commandments_ forbid sinful thoughts and desires in
matters forbidden by the Sixth and Seventh Commandments. On this point
St. Ignatius remarks that when an evil thought is promptly dismissed,
there is merit, not sin; and if it returns again and again and is always
resisted, there is more and more merit. But a venial sin is committed
when one listens to the evil suggestion so as to dwell a little on it,
or to admit some carnal delight, or to be somewhat negligent in
rejecting it. A grievous sin supposes that the thought or desire is
fully consented to.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                            On Eternal Loss


_Remarks_: The purpose of the first days of the Exercises being to
inspire an intense and lasting hatred of sin, it is highly proper that
we should meditate on the principal punishment of sin, the eternal loss
of the soul, the pains of Hell. Many Saints have been led to Heaven by
the road of fear, some religious Orders acknowledge this as their chief
spirit. No one can afford to do without the fear of God; we should all
nourish it; so that, if ever our love of God should be too weak to keep
us from sin, the fear of Hell may restrain us. We descend into that
abyss in thought at present, that we may not hereafter be cast into it
in reality.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see in the center of the earth a vast ocean
of fire, in which are plunged countless souls condemned to eternal
punishment.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg earnestly from your Sovereign Lord for an intense and
abiding fear of those awful sufferings and for a firm purpose of never
sinning again.

_POINT I._ Recall to memory what we know of Hell; in particular:

1. That its existence and its dreadful nature are as clearly revealed in
Holy Writ as any truth whatever. For instance, Christ said: “If thy eye
scandalize thee, pluck it out. It is better for thee with one eye to
enter into the kingdom of God, than having two eyes to be cast into the
hell of fire; where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
extinguished. For every one shall be salted with fire” (St. Mark ix, 46,
48). Then there is the parable of Dives and Lazarus (St. Luke, xvi,
19-31).

2. That Hell awaits all those who die in mortal sin, whatever they may
have been in life, religious or seculars, bishops or priests.

3. That vast multitudes go there: “Broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction, and many there are who go in thereat” (St. Matth. vii, 13).

Many who were supposed to be holy. See St. Liguori, “Melancholy
Examples.”

Many who had begun well, as Judas had.

4. That I am in danger, as long as I live, of sinning mortally, of dying
in sin and losing my soul. Perhaps some are in Hell through my fault.

_POINT II._ _What are the sufferings of the body in Hell_?

All the senses will be tormented, as for their gratification God has
been offended. Chiefly the sense of touch, and that by the horrible
torture of fire: “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire” (St.
Matth. xxv, 41), “Which of you can dwell with everlasting burnings?”
(Is. xxiii, 14).

God showed St. Teresa in a vision the place the Devil had prepared for
her in Hell. She narrates it thus: “I was one day in prayer, when I
found myself in a moment, without knowing how, plunged apparently into
Hell. I understood that it was our Lord’s will that I should see the
place which the devils kept in readiness for me, and which I had
deserved by my sins. It was but a moment, but it seems to me impossible
that I should ever forget it, if I were to live many years. The entrance
seemed to be by a long and narrow pass, like a furnace, very low, dark
and close. The ground seemed to be saturated with water, mere mud,
exceedingly foul, sending forth pestilential odors and covered with
loathsome vermin. At the end was a hollow place in the wall, like a
closet, and in that I saw myself confined. All this was even pleasant to
behold in comparison with what I felt there” (Coleridge, “Life of St.
Teresa,” Vol. I, p. 133). “She says,” Father Coleridge adds, “she cannot
describe what she felt. There was a fire in her soul. She suffered
unendurably in her body. All that she had suffered in diseases, or in
what Satan had been allowed to inflict upon her, was as nothing in
comparison; and she saw there was to be no intermission, no end to the
pain. But the pains of the body were as nothing to the pains of the
soul. She describes the anguish as a sense of oppression and stifling in
the soul, all the while tearing itself to pieces with remorse and
despair.”

_POINT III._ _What are the sufferings of the soul?_

1. _The memory_ will recall the abundance of graces, by which salvation
could so easily have been secured; the example of companions who were
innocent or sincerely penitent, who are now in Heaven; the soul’s own
goodness and happiness at the time of its first Communion and at other
periods of its life.

2. _The understanding_ will then fully realize that one thing alone was
necessary while on earth, that life was given to work out salvation,
that all the rest was vanity, that all illusions are now dispelled, and
there is no happiness to be found by the creature except in God; there
is only total disappointment, absolute loss of all satisfaction; and
this pain of disappointed love will then be greater than all the other
sufferings.

3. _The will_ then will desire only God, for the love and possession of
whom all its nature longs, because it was made for Him alone. Therefore
the soul will hate its own perverseness with a sovereign hatred, and
curse itself in its absolute despair.

4. The soul will always have present to its mind _the awful sentence_
pronounced by the Supreme Judge: “Depart from me into eternal fire.”
“Eternal”: What, in comparison, are days, or nights, or months, or years
of suffering? Ever in pain, ever in despair; no end, no hope of an end
or of any mitigation.

_Colloquy_ with Jesus crucified, dying for our sins; with Mary, the
refuge of sinners.




                             THE THIRD DAY


                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
                        A Preparation for Death


_1st Prelude._ A captain of infantry had been ordered by his general to
lead his company at the first dawn of light the next morning up a
neighboring hill where the enemy had just planted a masked battery. To
spend the intervening night he had a log cabin allotted him. He felt it
was a dangerous task assigned him, as he was likely to be shot while
ascending the hill at the head of his men. Yet he faltered not, for he
was brave. But before lying down to rest, he lit a candle, pulled out
his prayer book, and knelt down to prepare himself for a good death.

Imagine that God gives you the present hour to prepare for your own
approaching death.

_2nd Prelude._ O Lord: give me the grace of making to-day a thoroughly
good preparation for death.

_POINT I._ _It is absolutely certain that I shall die_, it is only a
matter of more or less delay; “It is appointed unto men once to die”
(Hebr. ix, 27). “Dust thou art and into dust thou shalt return” is the
sentence pronounced on me, as on all men. No sensible man doubts this,
yet many try to forget it, and live as if the sentence were not for
them. O my Lord God! I will not be so foolish; and I accept with
humility the sentence of death. I have deserved it, and I will suffer it
in punishment and expiation of my sins.

_POINT II._ _All the circumstances of my death are very uncertain._ 1.
_The time._ No one but God can assure me of another day of life. Many
are at this moment in vigorous health who will be dead to-morrow. I may
be one of them: “If thou shalt not watch, I will come to thee as a
thief, and thou shalt not know at what hour I shall come to thee” (Apoc.
iii, 3). A thief comes when least expected. Many are sick for a time and
yet expire suddenly before they realize their danger. Even many of the
Saints were called away in the middle of their most important careers:
St. Francis Xavier when on the point of entering China, St. Thomas
Aquinas before he could finish his Summa of Universal Theology, St.
Bonaventure during the General Council of Lyons, etc. Am I ready? Was I
ready at any hour of last year?

2. _The place_ may be anywhere; we cannot find a spot secure against the
shafts of death.

3. _The manner_; It may be sudden, whether from a latent disease which
we never suspected, or from any of the multitudinous accidents so common
in the modern rush of life.

Or it may be preceded by weeks of suffering in an unconscious or
semi-conscious condition. Even when the danger is known to others, it is
often hidden from the patient. My Lord God! I humbly submit beforehand
to all the circumstances Thou hast determined shall attend my death, to
all its physical and mental sufferings, to its sudden stroke or
lingering approach. Only grant me the grace of being well disposed when
it shall arrive. Make known to me, I pray, what sacrifices I must make
that I may be well prepared.

_POINT III._ _What shall be my sentiments when death is nigh?_ Some
rejoice at its approach; like St. Paul, they wish to be dissolved and to
be with Christ. Many are horrified when it comes, and wish in vain that
they could live their lives all over again. Now is the time to prepare,
then it will be too late. Many again, even good Christians and
religious, would then wish to make some more or less important changes
before expiring. Now is the time to make them.

I have seen a novice dying most joyously, with these words on his lips:
“I know I am going to Heaven.” I have seen a religious priest, who had
led a pious and zealous life, bursting into tears on his deathbed,
explaining that he now realized how much more he could have done for God
and the good of souls, and how bitterly he regretted his former
negligences. And yet he was a model pastor of souls. What shall be my
sentiments?

_Colloquy_ with Jesus and Mary, begging earnestly to know now what is
still wanting to me, that I may provide in good time; “O Lord! make me
know my end—that I may know what is wanting to me!” (Ps. 38).


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                       On the Particular Judgment


_1st Prelude._ Imagine that your soul has left your body and is now to
be judged by Christ.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly that you may understand all things now as
you shall then, and that you may act accordingly.

_POINT I._ _Consider when that judgment will take place_: “It is
appointed unto men once to die, and, after this, the judgment” (Hebr.
ix, 27). Human tribunals delay trials to take evidence; not so God. One
moment we may be sinning or meriting, the next moment we are judged for
it. No warning is given beforehand, as for a college examination. The
rich man of whom Christ said that he was going to build new barns,
saying to his soul: “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years;
take thy rest, eat, drink, make good cheer,” was rebuked by the Lord,
saying: “Thou fool, this night they will require thy soul from thee”
(St. Luke xii, 16-20).

Be ever ready. Make frequent acts of perfect contrition. Make every
confession as if it were to be the last of your life.

_POINT II._ _Consider the persons present_: 1. _The soul_; Father
Gaudier, S. J., describes it thus: “It receives a novel manner of
knowing, without the body, by which its entire life is represented to it
at a glance. It thoroughly understands what is the nature of created
things, its own present condition and the new aspect of things; and it
sees itself naked, solitary and deserted by all, with nothing but its
good and bad works, in the presence of its Judge. Hence arises a very
different view of its own concerns and all created and external things
from what it had before. Besides, its will is changed; for all love of
created goods is vanished, and in its stead there is a most powerful
impulse towards God as its last end. This tendency, now that the
hindrance of the body is removed, urges it most forcibly to this union”
(Introd. ad Solid. Perfect., p. 196).

2. _Christ_ is now manifested to the soul. He is the God who condemned
to eternal woe the rebel angels, Judas, and all who are in Hell, and who
has rewarded all the Saints with eternal bliss. As man, He is now going
to examine what fruit the soul now before Him has produced. No other
parties can well be expected to be present, except, perhaps the Guardian
Angel and an evil spirit, ready to execute the sentence.

_POINT III._ _Consider the account to be rendered_, of every thought,
word, action and omission from the first dawn of reason till the last
breath. Even good works may contain many imperfections, as St. Paul
explains by this comparison. “Other foundation no man can lay but that
which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. Now if any man build upon this
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, every
man’s work shall be manifest; for the day of the Lord shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed in fire; and the fire shall try every man’s
work, of what sort it is” (I Cor. iii, 11-16).

The examination will embrace all the Commandments of God and of the
Church, the duties of one’s state of life, the proper use of one’s
talents, one’s opportunities, etc.

a. There are _two consoling thoughts_ in this matter.

1. The religious vows probably act as a second Baptism, cancelling all
former debts. St. Thomas attributes this effect to the perfect
dispositions of the person making them. If this is the reason, then it
would seem that the renewal of vows may have the same effect, whenever
it is made with equally good dispositions.

2. Whatever has once been forgiven remains forgiven. Merit when lost may
return, but forgiven sins do not return.

b. Yet there are _two classes of sins that may well cause anxiety_.

1. Those of which we have never truly repented, perhaps because we were
too proud to admit we were to blame, and laid the blame on others
instead.

2. Those sins which we have very often confessed, but which we have made
no serious efforts to avoid in future, perhaps because we had no real
contrition for them.

_POINT IV._ _The sentence_ will be just what is deserved; for a judgment
is not an act of mercy, but of the intellect seeing the truth of things
and pronouncing accordingly: “I will judge thee according to thy ways,
and I will lay upon thee all thy crimes. My eye shall not spare, neither
will I show mercy” (Ezech. vii, 8, 9). “Then will he (the Son of man)
render to every man according to his works” (St. Matth. xvi, 27).

If a mortal sin be there, all is lost: “If a just man shall turn away
from his justice and shall commit iniquity—he shall die in his sin, and
his justices which he hath done shall not be remembered” (Ezech. iii,
20).

The sentence will be final, because there is no appeal to a higher
tribunal, and we can no longer merit a change: “The night cometh when no
man can work” (St. John ix, 4).

The sufferings of Purgatory come to an end, but merit neglected to be
acquired can never more be gained.

We may well exclaim with St. Magdalene de Pazzi: “It is a terrible thing
to have to stand before the judgment seat of God.”

_Colloquy._ Ask to understand all things now as you shall realize them
at the judgment.


                             CONSIDERATION
                        On Purity of Conscience


The main purpose of the first part of the Spiritual Exercises, or what
St. Ignatius calls the first week, is to purify the soul from all stains
of sin, and to strengthen it against all temptations to sin in future.
Of course mortal sin is the principal evil to be destroyed, it is the
greatest evil in the world. Since the religious life is essentially the
way of perfection, it presupposes the destruction of mortal sin; being
the way of the counsels, it supposes the observance of the Commandments.

Yet it is quite proper that religious in their yearly retreats should
review the Exercises of the first week, the meditations regarding mortal
sins and the fear of the Lord, not so much to obtain pardon of sins
committed, as to strengthen their resolutions and to take precaution
against committing sins in the future. In fact, as a rule, religious do
not commit mortal sins; and, although they must be constantly on their
guard against temptations,—because, while the spirit is willing, the
flesh is weak,—yet it is a consoling truth that they rarely fall so low.
A religious that frequently commits mortal sins lives far below the
normal standard of his state of life. He is indeed greatly to be pitied,
and is in serious danger of becoming a reprobate. Of course no one
should ever be discouraged, but such a person should arouse himself to
fervent prayer and vigorous exertions; he is walking on the brink of the
precipice.

Whoever has come to the present part of the Spiritual Exercises is
supposed to have conceived an intense horror of mortal sin. But we ought
not to be satisfied with attaining this first degree of purity of
conscience; we ought to strive seriously to attain the second degree, or
to confirm ourselves in the same; that is, we ought also carefully to
avoid the commission of all deliberate venial sins. We must distinguish
between two kinds of venial sins, the deliberate and the indeliberate.
Both kinds suppose that, while committing them, we are aware that we are
doing something which God forbids, or omitting what He commands; else we
do not really displease Him. But the sin is deliberate when we fully
notice the evil, and do it nevertheless with full consent of our free
will; else it may be called indeliberate. Indeliberate sins will escape
from time to time even very virtuous persons, owing to our unruly
passions and the weakness of the human will in consequence of Adam’s sin
and of evil habits.

Each of such faults, singly considered, could be avoided; for whatever
cannot be avoided at all cannot be laid to our blame; but all cannot be
avoided together. Thus a beginner may be able to pronounce correctly
every word on a page of his reader, but will not proceed far without
making some mistakes.

So we cannot avoid all indeliberate venial sins a long time together,
unless God give us an extraordinary grace to do so.

But with the ordinary grace of God a virtuous person may avoid all
deliberate venial sins. For this purpose we must first of all convince
ourselves of the great evil contained in every wilful offense of God;
for by such offense a poor mortal puts his will above the will of his
Creator and Lord. This evil is so great that no creature, nor even all
creatures united, could by their own power fully atone for it.

This becomes more evident when we consider some examples of the severe
punishments inflicted by the Lord on those guilty of such offences. Thus
when King David had committed an act of vanity by ordering an
enumeration of all his subjects to see how great a monarch he had
become, which seems to have been only a venial sin, the Lord sent to him
the prophet Gad, to give him the choice between three punishments,
namely three years of famine, three months of flight before his enemies
or three days of pestilence on his people. He chose the pestilence, and
it carried off seventy thousand men (I Paral. xxi).

Moses for a venial fault was refused the honor of leading the Chosen
People into the promised land, which would have been a fitting crown of
all his labors. His sister Mary, for some murmuring against her brother,
was stricken with a leprosy and humiliated before all the people. In
fact, leprosy is a striking figure of the effect of venial sin on the
soul; for it disfigures the soul without depriving it of life. If a
visible leprosy were usually the effect of wilful venial sin, men would
be as anxious to avoid such an evil as they are now to escape that
bodily plague.

Then there are the pains of Purgatory to be considered, which are
deserved by venial sins; they are worse than any pain known to us in
this life. For, as St. Thomas remarks, they are different in kind: the
fire of Purgatory is not created for the service and comfort of man, but
for his punishment and torture. The examples of its duration which have
been made known by revelations to saintly souls are proofs of the
terrible evil such offences are in the sight of the just, all-holy God.
Father Faber, in his “All for Jesus” says: “In the revelations of Sister
Frances of Pampeluna, we find that, among some hundreds of cases, by far
the greater majority suffered 30, 40 or 60 years” (pp. 394, 395).

There results besides from venial sins a still worse consequence than
any transitory suffering, namely that they expose us to the danger of
committing mortal sins and losing our soul for eternity. This happens in
two ways, naturally and supernaturally.

1. It is _natural_ for man, when he does a good or a bad act, to become
thereby more inclined to do the same again under similar influences and
circumstances; thus habits are contracted of virtue and vice. The
commission of venial sins therefore inclines the soul to sin more
readily thereafter, and to sin, not only oftener, but also more
grievously; and thus venial often lead to mortal sins. This is not
theory only, but the teaching of constant experience. For instance, a
religious has acquired great purity of conscience, he is a model of
modesty; but he begins to neglect his rules, he gets accustomed to
glance rather freely at indelicate objects, he becomes habituated to
indulge his curiosity. Still he would shrink from anything impure. But
his imagination becomes more indelicate, his passions less restrained,
wilful venial sins multiply and grievous falls may follow sooner than he
expected. Mortal sins themselves may become habitual, and who can tell
where the evil will end? Even if only one mortal sin were thus brought
about, the evil is the greatest of misfortunes. But this growing habit
is likely to get still worse.

2. _Supernaturally_ a similar process is going on. By every act of
virtue we obtain, along with the merit, additional actual grace to merit
more; but when we sin, we fail to obtain this new accession of grace;
and thus it becomes less likely that we shall do better next time. We
may thus lose more and more grace by repeated venial faults; and in face
of an unusually strong temptation, we may be so weak as to yield assent.
No one becomes very bad on a sudden; but many gradually lose their
virtue and become reprobates. History is full of such examples, and
daily experience ought to be a constant warning against such danger.

But even if there were no danger of mortal sin (which is, of course, a
false supposition) a religious has a special reason to avoid all
deliberate sin in the fact that he has been made a favorite disciple of
the Blessed Saviour. When he wantonly offends the Lord, he deserves to
some extent the reproach originally addressed to the Chosen People, and
afterwards applied to Judas: “If my enemy had reviled me, I would verily
have borne with it. And if he that hated me had spoken great things
against me, I would perhaps have hidden myself from him. But thou a man
of one mind, my guide and my familiar, who didst take sweetmeats
together with me; in the house of the Lord we walked with consent” (Ps.
54). We would not willingly grieve or insult a friend; and is not Jesus
our dearest and most devoted friend? Certainly it ought to be one of the
principal resolutions of the retreat to strive earnestly and unceasingly
to avoid all deliberate sins.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                      To Excite Perfect Contrition


It is highly proper that we should not conclude this first part of the
retreat without striving earnestly to arouse within our hearts a deep
sorrow for all our sins, and that for the most perfect of motives,
namely because by them we have offended God, who is infinitely good in
Himself and infinitely bountiful to us. For this purpose we are going to
spend this hour of meditation in considering various manifestations of
the Divine goodness.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold the return of the Prodigal Son, whom
his aged father clasps most affectionately to his heart.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly for an intense love of God and a perfect
contrition for all your sins.

_POINT I._ Consider the parable of the Prodigal Son, in which the Lord
Jesus Himself has given us a most striking picture of the goodness of
our Heavenly Father. We may read to advantage the whole parable (St.
Luke xv, 11, etc.), but chiefly xv, 20-24: “And rising up he came to his
father. And when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and was
moved with compassion; and running to him fell upon his neck and kissed
him. And the son said to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, I am not now worthy to be called thy son. And the father
said to his servants: Bring forth quickly the first robe, and put it on
him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. And bring hither
the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat and make merry; because
this my son was dead and is come to life again, was lost and is found;
and they began to make merry.”

Not a word of reproach, no limit to the pardon, only expressions of
happiness, and solicitude to restore the boy’s honor. Thus does God act
with sincere penitents.

_POINT II._ As the feast prepared is to-morrow’s Holy Communion, we will
consider in the next place how Christ _prepared_ His Apostles for their
Communion. “Before the festival day of the Pasch, Jesus knowing that his
hour was come, and that he should pass out of this world to the Father,
having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.

“And when supper was done—he rises from supper, and layeth aside his
garments and having taken a towel, girdeth himself, etc.” (St. John
xiii, 1-5).

The washing of the feet is the image of the Sacrament of Penance, in
which Christ washes away our sins in His sacred blood. What a wonderful
invention of His infinite love: And how we ought to love Him, in return,
instead of offending Him by sin. Elicit an act of contrition.

_POINT III._ Consider that other manifestation of Divine love, the
institution of the Blessed Sacrament: “Whilst they were at supper Jesus
took bread, and blessed, and broke, and gave to his disciples, and said:
Take ye and eat, this is my body. And taking the chalice, he gave
thanks, and gave to them saying: Drink ye all of this. For this is my
blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many unto the
remission of sins” (St. Matth. xxvi, 26-28).

Could we conceive any greater love than that Christ should feed us with
His own sacred body and blood? And yet, when we sin, we turn against
Him, as when a serpent bites its benefactor who warms it in his bosom.
My God, pardon me! My God, I love Thee above all things! I am most sorry
for having offended Thee!

A consoling fact like the following may give us a more sensible
appreciation of the favor granted us in the reception of Holy Communion.
On All Saints Day, 1612, St. Alphonsus Rodriguez had received the
Blessed Sacrament with his brethren, when the good Lord showed him in a
sensible manner His presence in the hearts of all those who had just
communicated, so that he beheld the Saviour resplendent with glory,
whole and entire in each of the religious (Life of Bl. Alph. Rodr. by a
Lay-brother, p. 82).

_POINT IV._ Imagine you visit a church or chapel at midnight. Jesus
Christ is there then, as at every hour of night and day. He is praying
for you to His Heavenly Father, because he loves you, and He knows you
need abundant graces to lead a worthy life. It was when Blessed Margaret
Mary was adoring Him in her convent chapel that Jesus appeared to her on
the altar pointing to His Sacred Heart, and saying: “Behold the Heart
that has loved man so much, and I receive nothing but coldness in
return.” He longs for love; and certainly we did not love Him when we
sinned. O my Jesus! I wish to love Thee. I detest my sins.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, protesting to Him that I love Him
sincerely with my whole heart and soul, that I am most heartily sorry
for having offended Him, because He is infinitely amiable, begging that
I may love Him more and more.




                             THE FOURTH DAY


Now that we have freed our souls from every sinful affection, Christ
comes to offer Himself to lead us on, that by following Him we may
establish the Kingdom of God in our own souls and in the souls of
others. The study of the end of man was the foundation of a good life,
the study of the following of Christ is the foundation of a perfect
life.


                            FIRST MEDITATION
                         The Kingdom of Christ


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see Christ going from town to town,
announcing the Kingdom of His Father.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for grace to understand the call and to follow Him
with a generous heart.

_POINT I._ Consider this parable: God has chosen a most noble Catholic
prince, endowed with all the virtues that conciliate the esteem and love
of every good and brave man; and He has appointed him to put down all
the enemies of Christ, to establish the Kingdom of God in all countries,
and make the Lord reign supreme over all mankind. He is the greatest of
heroes, accomplished in person, magnetic in influence, beyond any mortal
that has ever appeared on earth.

This King issues a call to all Catholic warriors (for in this parable
only warriors are spoken of) inviting them to rally under his standard.
They are going to fight for the grandest, holiest and dearest of all
causes. He promises them certain victory, no one of his followers shall
perish unless it be through his own fault. Yet it will be a strenuous
campaign, full of hardships and fatigue for all concerned. But the King
himself will ever be in the midst of his soldiers, in the thickest of
the fight, sharing in their hardships and privations, so that no one
will be expected to toil and endure more than the leader; and each one
shall share in the victory in proportion to the sacrifices he shall have
made in the holy cause.

What should a brave warrior answer to such an appeal? The promises may
appear to be excessive, impossible; but they are so in the parable only,
not in the real facts figured by it.

_POINT II._ Now consider the application to the reality signified. The
Son of God Himself is that King, nobler and grander than any mere human
genius or hero, who has truly come into this world to establish the
Kingdom of God, and who is accomplishing this appointed task.

He calls upon all men, women and children to follow Him in His contest
against God’s enemies; not that He needs their aid, but that they may
share in the glory of the victory.

For this purpose all must, in some measure, share His labors and His
sacrifices; but He will ever be by their side, and endure more than any
of them. Every one will share in the magnificent rewards in proportion
to his generous exertions.

What answer should every generous heart make to such an appeal from his
great, good God, his sovereign Lord and Saviour? “To-day, if you shall
hear his voice, harden not your hearts” exclaims the Psalmist (Ps. 94).

_POINT III._ Those who wish to show greater affection, and to signalize
themselves in the King’s service, not only will offer their whole
persons to labor, but will also act against their own sensuality, and
say: “Eternal Lord of all things, I make my oblation with Thy favor and
help, in the presence of Thine infinite goodness, and in the sight of
Thy glorious Mother, and of all the Angels of Thine Heavenly court,
protesting that I wish and desire, and that it is my deliberate
determination (provided only it be for Thy greater service and praise)
to imitate Thee in bearing all insults and reproaches, and all poverty,
as well actual poverty as poverty of spirit, if only Thy Divine Majesty
be pleased to choose and receive me to this life and state.” As Jesuits,
we are certainly called to this close imitation of Christ. We must, not
only faithfully resist all temptations to sin, but also generously
follow our King in sacrificing lawful pleasures, trampling upon worldly
honors, upon self-esteem and bodily comforts, leading mortified lives,
as worthy companions of Jesus.

_POINT IV._ That war against Satan and against human depravity has been
going on for nineteen centuries. Millions have been following Christ to
victory, and are now reigning with Him in Heaven. Our time is come; we
too must make our choice. Our King has said: “He who is not with me is
against me,” “No man can serve two masters” (St. Matth. vi, 24). Let us
offer ourselves to be the generous and faithful followers of our Blessed
Saviour, imitating Him on earth that we may follow Him into the glory of
Heaven.

What sacrifices in particular can I offer Him?

_Colloquy._ Beg earnestly for light and grace to understand and follow
the example of Christ.


                           SECOND MEDITATION
                           On the Incarnation


Here St. Ignatius begins what he calls the Second Week of his Exercises,
in which he bids us study how the great King leads us in the grand
enterprise of establishing the Kingdom of His Father, by considering His
coming on earth, His nativity, His childhood and His private life. The
main purpose all along is to make us know Him more intimately, love Him
more ardently and follow Him more faithfully. This following consists in
making ourselves more and more like to Him: “Whom he (God) foreknew he
also predestinated to be made comformable to the image of his Son” (Rom.
viii, 29). By this conformity to Christ we make God reign in our hearts
and prepare ourselves to enter into His Heavenly Kingdom.

In this and the following exercises a change is made in the process so
far followed; namely, instead of recalling the facts to memory in the
body of the meditation, we now recall them in a special prelude, put
before the two usual ones. Then in the points we do less reasoning; we
rather look on and behold the event as it were passing before our eyes,
noticing in particular the persons, their words and their actions, and
dwelling on the thoughts and the sentiments which they suggest to our
minds. From the fact that we behold rather than reason, these exercises
are usually called _contemplations_, rather than _meditations_, though
the name is of little importance, provided the process be well
understood.

_1st Prelude._ Recall the facts to mind, as they are related by St. Luke
(i, 26-38).

_2nd Prelude._ Imagine you see the face of the earth, as it was at that
time, inhabited by diverse races of men, civilized and barbarian, all
steeped in vice and rushing on, a vast torrent, into the abyss of Hell.
In the little town of Nazareth the Virgin Mary at prayer, and God the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost looking down from Heaven upon the
varied scene.

_3rd Prelude._ Beg fervently that you may understand this mystery, and
may learn from it to know your King, Christ, more clearly, love Him more
ardently and follow Him more faithfully.

_POINT I._ _Study the scene_ as it was before the descent of the Angel,
noticing the persons, with their words and actions.

1. _The human race_, in a great variety of conditions: some rich, others
poor; some learned, others ignorant; some refined, others rude; some
suffering, others rejoicing; talking of wars and of pleasure, adoring
idols; but nearly all rushing on, like a vast torrent, into Hell.

2. Then consider the _chaste Virgin Mary_, praying for the coming of the
Messias, lowering herself in her own mind, thinking of her littleness
before God. Thus the poet tells of a drop of water saying to itself:
“how little I am in the vast ocean around me;” and at that moment a
shellfish swallowed the drop, and it lay hardening in the shell, and it
became the choicest pearl that ever shone on a queenly diadem. So was
Mary chosen in her humility.

3. Consider the _three Divine Persons_ looking down from Heaven upon the
scene below, seeing the mass of moral corruption, yet, instead of
sending down avenging fire or a new deluge of water to punish the guilty
race, pitying its sad condition. The Son of God steps down from His
throne, and casts Himself at the feet of His Heavenly Father, offering
Himself to assume our mortal nature and to atone for our sins.

Here is the first step of our King, lowering Himself: _Exinanivit
semetipsum_: “He emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being
made in the likeness of men, and in habit found as a man” (Phil. ii, 7).
We are to imitate Him, to be made like to Him. This is our first lesson;
let us learn it well: we must be humble.

_POINT II._ The Angel Gabriel is sent to Mary to announce her selection
as the Mother of God. He comes, not to the mighty city of Rome, to its
gilt palaces and learned scholars; the things of earth are very small in
the sight of God. He comes to an unknown little town in a despised
country, to a poor maiden, unknown to the world.

_Listen to the words spoken_: “Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with
thee, blessed art thou among women.” Mary is too humble to realize that
such words could be suitable to her: “She was troubled at his saying.”
But the Angel explains and dispels her fear. He adds: “Thou shalt
conceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a son, and thou shalt call
his name Jesus. He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the
most High.” Now her Virgin heart is alarmed; so precious is the jewel of
virginity in her sight. “How shall this be done, because I know not man?
And the Angel answering said to her: The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the most High shall overshadow thee. And
therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God.” Thus reassured, she understands that such is the will of
God; her answer beautifully expresses her humility: “Behold the handmaid
of the Lord, be it done to me according to thy word.” She does not say:
behold then the future queen of Heaven and earth, but the handmaid of
the Lord. Jesus has associated her with Himself making her, here and all
through life, the model of every virtue.

Her example is like that of the Redeemer: humility, humility.

_POINT III._ After her consent had thus been expressed, God, who always
respects the free will of men, formed in her womb, from her virgin
blood, the body of her Divine Son: “And the Word was made flesh and
dwelt among us” (St. John i, 14). As when he formed the body of Adam out
of the slime of the earth, He breathed into his face the breath of life;
so now He created the soul of Christ, and united it at once with the
embryonic body to build it up to the perfection of manhood, and at the
same moment God the Son assumed this humanity into substantial union
with His Divine Person.

This is the second step in the career of our King, again a species of
self-annihilation: _Exinanivit semetipsum_. It is also an example of His
love for men, of His boundless zeal for their salvation and
glorification. He stooped down to earth in order to raise man to Heaven.

_Colloquy_ with the Lord incarnate:—gratitude, love; promise to follow
Him, to humble self, to labor for the good of souls. Ask for the help of
Mary. Our Father—Hail Mary.


                             CONSIDERATION
                       On the Imitation of Christ


The main truth that St. Ignatius inculcates, both in the meditation on
the Kingdom of Christ and in all the subsequent portions of his
Exercises, is that man must be perfected by imitating Christ, by making
himself like to the Son of God made man, according to the words of St.
Paul: “Whom God foreknew he also predestinated to be made conformable to
the image of his Son, that he might be the first-born among many
brethren” (Rom. viii, 29).

The intense love of God, which the Saint conceived during his retreat at
Manresa, prompted him to make himself as like to Christ as, with God’s
grace, was possible; and the zeal for the salvation of souls, which he
learned from the example of Christ, urged him to form a band of men like
to himself, or rather like to the God-man, a select band to be, as it
were, a bodyguard of the Divine King in the holy warfare, undertaken to
establish the Kingdom of God. This is the spirit of the Society of
Jesus, and of all religious Orders, and to some extent of all who wish
to attain perfection. For this purpose the principal means to be used is
the study of the life of Christ, which is to be the chief occupation of
the exercitant during this and the following days. It is not a work of
human skill, but one of the direct influence of the Holy Spirit; He
alone can produce in the heart of man the supernatural likeness to the
Son of God. As He sanctified St. Ignatius, so He sanctifies all those
who faithfully and generously perform these exercises.

We may, in some respects, compare the process of sanctification to the
work of a painter who produces an exquisite likeness of a distinguished
personage on his canvas. The first outlines of the supernatural likeness
of a child of men to the Son of God are traced by the Divine Artist in
the Sacrament of Baptism. The infant’s soul receives the precious
impress as the unconscious canvas receives the colors, without its own
co-operation. Yet already then the difference is immense between a mere
child of earth and an adopted child of God. But very much remains to be
accomplished by the Holy Ghost before the likeness is perfected. And
this increase of sanctification is the most important work that is being
done on earth from generation to generation: “For the perfecting of the
Saints—for the edifying of the body of Christ” (Eph. iv, 12).

Most of this further sanctification is to be produced by the Holy Ghost
in our hearts with our co-operation: He teaches us how to _make
ourselves_ like to Christ, while He aids us to do it. For His teaching
does not consist in simply suggesting to us what we must do, as we teach
a child its Catechism; but He acts as does a music teacher with his
pupils, who makes them constantly practise what they are learning. It is
by their own efforts that they are to acquire the art. So the Spirit of
God makes us like unto Christ by helping us to act as Christ did, to
practise the virtues of which He has given us the example. In this
consists the sanctification of the soul, in the imitation of Christ.

How Christ acted during His whole career, from His incarnation to His
ascension, this is the study of the second, third and fourth weeks of
the Exercises. We will here call attention to some of the characteristic
traits of His life on earth.

1. His conduct was diametrically opposed to that by which Adam and Eve
had forfeited their original happiness. They had aspired to rise above
their own condition and become like unto God. For the Devil had said:
“God doth know that in what day soever you shall eat thereof, your eyes
shall be opened, and you shall be as gods, knowing good and evil” (Gen.
iii, 5). Christ, on the contrary, while being God, stooped down and made
Himself man; and He continued lowering Himself more and more, becoming
the poorest child on earth, born in a stable, laid upon straw, “a worm
and no man, the reproach of men and the outcast of the people” (Ps. 21),
condemned to a shameful death, and, as a criminal, crucified with
thieves. If then we wish to be like Christ, we must practise humility.

2. Another characteristic trait of Christ’s conduct is seen in the means
He used to establish the Kingdom of His Father. He could have made the
colossal power of Rome His tool to effect that purpose, or have employed
the wisdom of the philosophers or the elegance of the writers of that
classic age. But instead He used ignorant and timid men, and first
gathered into His fold the poor and despised of the earth, as St. Paul
expressed it: “For see your vocation, brethren, that there are not many
wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble; but the
foolish things of the world hath God chosen that he may confound the
wise, and the weak things of the world hath God chosen that he may
confound the strong, and the base things of the world, and the things
that are contemptible hath God chosen, and things that are not, that He
might bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in His
sight” (I Cor. i, 26-29).

Must we then, to imitate Christ, cast all human learning to the winds?
By no means; but we must understand that merely natural means cannot
produce supernatural effects, that all the learning and all the power of
the world cannot save or sanctify a soul. And therefore we must trust in
supernatural means. As to the natural means, Christ did not need them to
accomplish His purpose; but we must use all the means, natural and
supernatural, that God puts at our disposal; yet remembering all along
that we must put our main confidence in the supernatural, in the help of
grace, which is secured by the imitation of our King.

We must then ever keep our eyes upon Him, study His example, and
reproduce His virtues in ourselves. It will often happen that to act
thus we must do things which seem foolish in the eyes of a worldly
wisdom, as when St. Francis Borgia resigned his office of viceroy, in
which he was doing so much good, to hide himself in the religious state;
or when the Seven Holy Founders of the Servites of Mary gave up all
their riches to become poor like Christ.

A beautiful illustration of the way in which we are to imitate the
Saviour is given us in the Book of Judges, where Gedeon and his three
hundred followers rescued their people from oppression by means
apparently most unwise, yet fully successful because they obeyed God
with heroic fidelity. Gedeon was designed by Divine Providence to be a
type of Christ. Jesus is our Gedeon, and we can learn how we must follow
Him by studying the story of Gedeon in Holy Writ.

The Israelites in his day had been conquered by the Madianites and
Amalekites, who were overrunning their land with a countless army, and
destroying all they could not carry off. The Chosen People were reduced
to a state of slavery and starvation. So they repented of their
idolatry, and called upon the Lord for pardon and mercy. God sent them a
savior in the person of the faithful Gedeon. This hero, encouraged by
miracles, which he had seen, destroyed the altar and the grove of Baal,
and then gathered together 32,000 men, trusting in God that with this
small force he could defeat the vast number of the foes. But God told
him his followers were too many; if they conquered, they would attribute
the victory to their own prowess. He bade him choose only 300 of them,
and promised Gedeon that with these alone he would gain a complete
victory.

Now notice how this was accomplished; it was by means apparently most
rash and foolish. The Scripture narrates it thus: “Gedeon divided the
300 men into three parts, and gave them trumpets in their hands, and
empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers. And he said to them: I
will go into one part of the camp, and _do you as I shall do_. When the
trumpet shall sound, in my hand, blow you also the trumpets on every
side of the camp.—They began to sound their trumpets, and clap the
pitchers one against another—And they cried out, The sword of the Lord
and of Gedeon—And the Lord sent the sword into all the camp and they
killed one another” (Judges vii, 16-22).

The immense army of the foe was destroyed, and the country delivered by
the 300 unarmed men. These had simply done what they saw their leader
do, and God had done the rest. Christ is our Gedeon; we must simply do
what He did, and God will do the rest: He will establish His Kingdom in
our hearts, and by us, no matter how weak the instruments, effect the
salvation of souls.


                            THIRD MEDITATION
                         On the Birth of Christ


_1st Prelude._ Recall the facts to mind, by reading St. Luke i, 1-20.

_2nd Prelude._ See the stable, with the Divine Infant lying on the straw
in the manger, with Mary and Joseph kneeling in adoration.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask to understand how Christ has loved you, that you may
love Him ardently and follow Him faithfully.

_POINT I._ Consider how Mary and Joseph received the order to go from
Nazareth to Bethlehem to be enrolled there. Notice the persons, their
words and their actions.

1. _The pagan emperor_ who ordered the census, no matter what was his
motive, was an agent of Divine Providence to bring the Holy Family to
Bethlehem. His order had been issued three years before; it arrived at
Nazareth just at the right time for God’s purposes.

2. _St. Joseph_ brings it home, knowing what inconvenience it would
cause, but resigned to God’s will.

3. _Mary_, though she sees it comes at a most inopportune time, as far
as man can judge, has only words and thoughts of cheerful submission to
the voice of authority. Both prepare at once for the journey, and start
as soon as possible.

_POINT II._ _See the Holy Family arriving in Bethlehem._ They have
traveled five days, over 110 miles, Mary perhaps riding on an ass or in
a rude cart, and Joseph leading the animal. Both now are dust begrimed
and tired out, glad to get at last to the one inn of the town; but they
are disappointed and find no room there to receive them. Follow them in
imagination as they wander through the poorer streets, asking here and
there for a night’s lodging, but refused at every door. Here now are the
holiest persons that ever trod the earth, and see how the Lord allows
them to suffer for our example of patience. And the Divine Child, how
helpless: “He came unto his own, and his own received him not” (St. John
i, 11). Happy they, if any such there were, who spoke a kind word to
them, even a word of excuse for a refusal; it must have brought a
blessing. Do I always speak kindly to the poor? Do I render every
service I can? God willed it all, that Jesus might be born in a stable,
rather than in a comfortable cottage; laid on straw, rather than on a
cushion. Our edification is all the greater on Christmas day. But their
lot was hard. So too our sufferings shall be turned into joy.

_POINT III._ _Behold the stable_, in which they have found a refuge.
Cattle were there before them, and the floor is littered with their
leavings. Mary and Joseph patiently tidy up a spot where they may rest,
and collect the cleanest blades of straw to lay them in the manger,
provident for the expected birth of the Divine Child.

There, during the night, Mary is miraculously delivered, and in an
ecstasy of love and joy, presses the Son of God to her maternal breast.
She tenderly wraps Him in the swaddling clothes she has brought along
for the purpose, and reposes Him upon the straw of the manger, that she
and Joseph may kneel before Him in humble adoration. Angels are there of
course to honor the King of glory; but they appear not to the sight nor
charm the ear with their Heavenly song, that all may be as desolate as
possible. He came to share our poverty and our loneliness.

Meanwhile His glory is beginning to be manifested elsewhere. For a
bright angel announces to the shepherds the birth of a “Saviour, who is
Christ the Lord in the city of David,” and he adds: “This shall be a
sign unto you; you shall find the infant wrapped in swaddling clothes,
and laid in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude
of the heavenly army, praising God and saying: Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace to men of good will” (St. Luke ii, 11-14).

He who came to assume our poverty made the poor His favorites; to them
He was first revealed. If we wish to enjoy His favors, let us be
satisfied with little, study rather with how little we can get along
than how much we can acquire. “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven” (St. Matth. v, 3).

The closest followers of Christ are known by their resemblance to Him.
And how is He known? The Angel has proclaimed it: by His poverty: “And
this shall be a sign unto you; you shall find the infant wrapped in
swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger.”

_Colloquy_ with the Divine Infant, loving Him, thanking Him, begging for
the spirit of poverty, humility; and with Mary and Joseph, begging of
them to obtain for me these precious dispositions.




                             THE FIFTH DAY


                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
                        On the Flight into Egypt


_1st Prelude._ Recall the facts, as narrated by St. Matthew ii, 13-19.

_2nd Prelude._ See St. Joseph quietly asleep in the night, and the Angel
standing before him to deliver his message.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask the grace to understand the lessons taught in this
mystery by Jesus, Mary and Joseph, so as to know your King more
intimately, love Him more ardently and follow Him more faithfully.

_Point I._ _Consider the message of the Angel_, noticing particularly
the persons, their words and their actions.

1. _The persons._ The Angel is a faithful messenger, a model of
exactitude when a task is entrusted to us. He addresses Joseph because
he is the head of the family. So God usually directs us through our
superiors, even if these should be less able, even as Joseph was less
gifted than the others. Jesus and Mary are not visited: “Take the child
and his mother.”

2. Consider the _words_ spoken: “Arise and take the child and his
mother, and fly into Egypt, and be there until I shall tell thee; for it
will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to destroy him.” The
action required implies many great difficulties; first a very long
journey of hundreds of miles, and that through a wild country, where
savage animals and robbers roamed. The parable of the Good Samaritan
shows that robbers infested those regions, and the watch kept by the
shepherds points to the presence of wolves, bears, etc. Then they are to
leave at once, with no provisions for so long a journey: “Arise, and
take, etc.” They are not even to say a kind farewell to the neighbors
who had befriended them, but must leave in secret like criminals. And
the motive assigned by the Angel is unsatisfactory to human reason:
“Herod will seek the child to destroy him.” Were there not a thousand
easier ways to prevent this? Was not God wise and powerful enough to
save His Divine Son in Bethlehem? Or could they not have gone to Mary’s
cousin Elizabeth, where young John the Baptist was living in security?
Perhaps we might have been self-opiniated enough to find such
objections; but Jesus, Mary and Joseph did not criticize.

3. _The Actions_ of these exhibit a prompt, cheerful and perfect
obedience. These are our models. Have we always acted thus? Is it our
habit now to do so?

_POINT II._ _Consider the exile itself._ How the Holy Family was
supported during the many weeks their travel must have lasted, we cannot
imagine. They may have suffered many severe hardships; most probably
they did, since Christ had come to give the example of patience under
sufferings. But God’s Providence watched over every step of theirs, and
supplied all their wants as far as was conformable to His designs.

He did not do so only on account of their privileged personalities, but
He ever does the same for all who trust in Him. “I say to you, be not
solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what
you shall put on—for after all these things do the heathens seek. For
your Father knoweth that you have need of all these things. Seek you
therefore first the Kingdom of God and His justice, and all these things
shall be added unto you” (St. Matth. vi, 25-33).

We can especially trust in God’s assistance when we are obeying His
commands, as was the Holy Family at that time. Therefore we should love
to be directed by our superiors, who make known God’s will to us. And
again, works done under obedience with a willing mind have a special
blessing on them. “An obedient man shall speak of victory” (Prov. xxi,
28). The heroic virtues practised in later ages by the solitaries in
those deserts may well have been the fruit of the obedience then
practised by the Holy Family.

Their stay in Egypt for several years among strangers is best
appreciated by those persons who have themselves experienced the
bitterness of exile. Christ knew that many of His followers would endure
those ills, and He wished to leave them a most consoling example.

_POINT III. Consider the massacre of the Innocents._ All its cruelty was
meant for Christ, and cruel persecution has been continued against His
followers throughout the ages, and is so to the present day. He had
foretold it: “The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant
above his lord. If they have called the good-man of the house Beelzebub,
how much more them of his household” (St. Matth. x, 24-25). We must then
be patient under any kind of molestation, though of course we may use
all honest means to prevent it.

The persecution works the good of them who properly endure it. See this
exemplified in the massacre of the innocents. It was very wickedly done,
a cruel injustice and bitter suffering to the little ones, and a still
more dreadful affliction to their mothers; but it resulted in eternal
glory for the children. When a priest blesses an article of devotion, he
makes a cross over it; so the Lord bestows His blessings with a cross.
Every sorrow comes from the hand of our loving Lord, and is meant for
the good of those who love Him: “To them that love God all things work
together unto good” (Rom. viii, 28).

_Colloquy._ With Jesus and Mary, begging for constant fidelity in the
imitation of my Divine Model amid all trials, with a firm confidence in
His loving providence: “Know ye that no one hath hoped in the Lord and
hath been confounded” (Ecclus. ii, 11).


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                     On the Private Life of Christ


_1st Prelude._ Recall the few verses in which Holy Writ records the
history of the eighteen years of Christ’s private life, from His loss in
the temple to His entrance on His public life: “And he went down with
them, and came to Nazareth; and was subject to them. And his mother kept
all these words in her heart. And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age, and
grace with God and men” (St. Luke ii, 51-52), “Is not this the
carpenter’s son?” (St. Matth. xiii, 55).

_2nd Prelude._ Imagine you see the modest cottage of the Holy Family at
Nazareth, where Mary is preparing a meal, while Joseph and the youthful
Saviour are working in the adjacent carpenter shop.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask grace to understand the wonderful lessons of sanctity
here taught, and to grow in the love and imitation of your Redeemer.

_POINT I._ Consider the words: “_He went down with them and came to
Nazareth._” He might have moved in the midst of the world, as He had
done for three days when lost in Jerusalem, but He wished to give an
example which people generally could imitate. Nearly all persons must
lead a private life during the greater portion, if not the whole of
their career. Restlessness to be abroad is very injurious to virtue. But
the inner life, needed to attain perfection, is favored by retirement
from the world. Hence all founders of religious orders require a retired
novitiate, and the Church strictly prescribes enclosure, which law has
not been relaxed except where charity to the neighbor demands it. It is
not the spirit of God that makes some priests aspire to conspicuous
offices and functions. Nazareth was good enough for Christ, though it
was so obscure a town that Nathanael asked, “Can anything good come from
Nazareth?” (St. John i, 46). It is a bad sign when a religious is
displeased because applied to obscure duties.

_POINT II._ Consider the words, “_And He was subject to them_”; that is,
Jesus was subject to Mary and Joseph. This is the chief lesson Christ
chose to teach the world during the first thirty years of His life. It
must then be of the utmost importance. St. Gregory says of it:
“Obedience is a virtue which, by itself alone, plants all other virtues
in the mind and preserves them after they are once planted” (L. 35 Mor.
c. 10). St. Ignatius, in his “Epistle on Obedience,” quoted these words
with emphatic approbation; and he has made this the characteristic
virtue of his Society. In fact the vow of obedience belongs to the
essence of the religious life, and some orders comprise all the
obligation of their members under the one vow of “obedience according to
their rule.” My perfection as a religious depends chiefly on the
perfection of my obedience.

Consider besides, in meditating on Christ’s private life, who was the
Person that obeyed; namely God Himself in His human nature. Whom did He
obey? His own creatures infinitely beneath Him in every respect. In what
did He obey?

In all the details of His life; in working for instance, under the
direction of Joseph, after the unskilful manner of that time. How
perfectly do I obey my superiors? I must make myself like unto Christ,
not in working miracles, but in submitting to my superiors.

_POINT III. Christ spent His private life in humble labor._ Such a
career is intended by the Lord for the vast majority of mankind. It is
the sentence pronounced upon our race: “In the sweat of thy face thou
shalt eat bread till thou return to the earth out of which thou wast
taken” (Gen. iii, 19). Such labor fosters devotion. It has always been
fondly cherished in learned religious bodies. During his voyage to India
which lasted thirteen months, St. Francis Xavier used to wash his soiled
linen in the sight of his fellow-passengers, while bearing the dignity
of Apostolic Nuncio, and he would never consent to be waited on by
others (Life, Bartholi and Maffei, p. 74).

_POINT IV._ “_And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age, and grace with God
and men._” It is by the faithful and steady exercise of the virtues
taught by our Divine model that Christians ever grow in sanctity; for
sanctity consists in this. And thus there are thousands to-day, as in
every period of the Church, of whom it can be said with truth, as is
here said of the Blessed Saviour, that they are growing in wisdom as
they are advancing in age; and as a consequence they grow in grace with
God; and meanwhile they also become daily more perfect subjects of
edification to their fellow-men.

That young religious are expected to resemble Christ in steady progress
in virtue is of course understood by all. But this should not be
confined to young religious. Older religious must persevere in this
imitation of Christ; their own welfare requires it, and the welfare of
the younger generation, who are naturally much influenced by the example
of their elders. All who profess to follow Christ should therefore grow
constantly in wisdom and obedience, in humility and generosity, in
charity and devotion, and in all the virtues, of which He has given such
bright examples.

_Colloquy_ with our Divine Lord, asking earnestly that we may know Him
more intimately, love Him more ardently and follow Him more faithfully;
and that we may correct the faults we have discovered in us during this
meditation.


                             CONSIDERATION
               On the Imitation of Christ’s Private Life


Since most of our progress in virtue is to be effected by our imitation
of Christ’s private life, it is worth while adding to the meditation we
have made on that subject some further appropriate considerations. Let
us examine in what exactly lay the excellence of that great model.


                                   I


It did not consist in the use of extraordinary austerities, such as were
practised by St. John the Baptist, whose holiness was so highly extolled
by the Saviour Himself. That would not have been a suitable model of
imitation for mankind generally. Christ’s sanctity was of course
infinitely superior; and it is the pattern on which our virtue must be
modeled.

In fact Christ’s private life was not distinguished from the common
lives of men by unusual bodily hardships. Millions of men and women in
our day, and in civilized lands, toil harder and enjoy fewer material
comforts than did the Holy Family. See how hard is the lot of vast
numbers of our laboring classes. See them going to their work at early
morning, carrying their cold lunches in their baskets, their only
support for the toils of the day. Their labor is fatiguing and
protracted, often quite exhausting, as is manifested by the bent forms
and wasted frames of so many of them. All day they hear rebukes, harsh
and gross language; and with their best efforts very many can scarcely
earn enough to keep up their strength. And when they return at night,
exhausted and begrimed with dirt, they have no comfortable cottage to
rest their wearied limbs; only some room in a tenement house, or in a
garret or cellar, crowded together with their wives and children, amidst
a rude and often vicious crowd of associates. Compared to their life
that of the Holy Family was one of decent comfort.


                                   II


_What then made the life of Christ so very holy and so very meritorious?
Especially two qualities._

1. Of course His Divine Person gave infinite merit to every act
performed by Him in His human nature. Now it is a great consolation for
us to remember that, by the gracious dispensation of the Lord, we too
are children of God, adopted brothers of Christ, as long as we live in
the state of grace; and, by the aid of the Holy spirit, who is diffused
in our hearts, we can make our acts worthy of supernatural reward. And
all this merit keeps on accumulating throughout our conscious life,
unless it be lost by mortal sin. Our principal fear ought ever to be
lest we thus foolishly lose it, and our bitterest regret if we have done
so.

2. The second source of holiness in Christ was _the perfection of his
intention_, ever aiming purely at the glory of His Heavenly Father. This
also we can and we ought to imitate, with the help of grace offered us
for this purpose. Here lies in fact the principal means of improving our
resemblance to Christ. And we can do so constantly, even in our
commonest actions, as the Apostle teaches us saying: “Whether you eat or
drink or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God” (I Cor. x, 31).

It is a very appropriate occupation for the time of the yearly retreat
to examine carefully to what extent we act habitually for a supernatural
intention, one resting on the faith, and not merely directed to some
natural advantage. It is the intention that determines the true value of
every human act. Whatever is done for some temporal good alone can only
claim a temporal reward. What am I habitually working for? Is it only
for some material or intellectual success? Or am I actuated to a great
extent by a merely natural impulse? Even though such impulse be not
sinful, not opposed to reason, still it is so much time and energy
wasted on the things of earth, and cannot add to my eternal happiness.
To act thus, as far as supernatural reward is concerned, is without
result, as one would waste his time and labor who would spend hours in
sewing without thread, or writing without ink in his pen.

People do not act so foolishly in the affairs of this life; but very
many do so in the things of eternity. Is not a great portion of my own
life thus habitually wasted by the want of a supernatural intention?
What improvement can I make in this matter?


                                  III


We are explicitly warned by our Blessed Saviour against _two copious
sources of waste of time and labor_.

1. The first regards actions which appear to be very reasonable and
virtuous; for instance the exercises of kindness to our friends and
relatives, or the practice of any other natural virtues in human
intercourse. Of all these Christ said: “If you love them that love you,
what reward shall you have? Do not even the publicans this? And if you
salute your brethren only, what do you do more? Do not also the heathens
this?” (St. Matth. v, 46-47). We ought to love our friends for God’s
sake.

2. The second source of waste is a very copious one among men, even
among religious; namely doing what is quite proper, but only to gain the
esteem of others.

This regard for the good opinion of our fellow-men is not sinful in
itself, as is erroneously supposed by some pious writers, who would have
penitents accuse themselves in Confession of vanity when they have said
or done anything to attract favorable attention or gain praise. Every
sin is essentially a violation of a law of God. But there is no law of
God forbidding us to seek the approbation of sensible persons. Does a
boy sin by trying to please his parents? Does a student sin by trying to
gain a prize? Jansenists would think so, but such is not Catholic
doctrine.

The desire of praise is a constant encouragement to the practice of the
natural virtues. Sin enters when praise is sought for doing what is
unreasonable, or when we take all the credit of good conduct to
ourselves, forgetting that our very goodness is a gift of God. For this
is blamed by St. Paul: “What hast thou that thou hast not received? and
if thou hast received, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not
received?” (I Cor. iv, 7). There is unfortunately plenty of sin in the
world; but we must avoid increasing it by forming false consciences.

Yet, even when reasonable praise is sought, and no sin committed, there
may be great evil in the loss of merit for Heaven; and the imitation of
Christ will teach us to avoid that evil. He acted in all things for the
glory of His Heavenly Father. “I seek not my own glory,” He said to the
Jews; and again: “He that sends me is with me,—for I do always the
things that please him” (St. John viii, 50, 29). By imitating the
Saviour in this, we become more and more like unto Him, and we lay up
abundant treasures for Heaven.

But He earnestly warns us not to lose such precious merit, saying: “Take
heed that you do not your justice before men, to be seen by them;
otherwise you shall not have reward of your Father, who is in Heaven”
(St. Matth. vi, 1). And speaking, in the next verse of the hypocrites
who gave alms that they might be seen by men, the Saviour adds: “They
have received their reward.”

But the loss of supernatural reward is not the only evil resulting from
the seeking of human praise; for, though, as we have seen, seeking such
honor is not in itself a sin, still it is very often the cause of sin,
even of mortal sin. For praise is very apt to affect the mind somewhat
as intoxicants affect the body; it arouses an inordinate greed of more
and more of the stimulant. The more we get of it, the more are various
passions aroused within us, and we are likely to become ambitious of
honor and of superiority over others, conceited and contemptuous of
others, becoming infatuated with our supposed good qualities; in a word
we gradually become proud, and a proud man is an abomination to the
Lord, or, as St. Luke expresses it: “That which is high to men is an
abomination before God” (xvi, 15).


                                   IV


A third cause that made the life of Christ so holy was that _He did
everything perfectly well_: “He hath done all things well” (St. Mark
vii, 37). Our goodness does not consist so much in what we do as in the
manner in which we do it. In fact, during the thirty years of His
private life, which we are now studying, Christ did no great things
whatever. His occupations were of the humblest kind; millions of men are
doing the same day after day; but His actions derived their excellence
from the perfection wherewith He did them, and our goodness consists in
imitating His perfect manner of acting.

The excellence of a masterpiece in painting and sculpture results from
the excellent delicacy and appropriateness of every, even the smallest,
detail; the beauty of a specimen of good penmanship does not result from
bold dashes, but from the perfection of every single letter; and so the
excellence of the life of Christ, and the lives of those who wish to
become like unto Him, lies not in doing great things, but in doing
everything excellently well.

Few of us, if any, have occasion of doing many great things in the
course of our life; but we can all, with God’s grace, do a multitude of
little things well, and thus resemble our Divine model. Our crown in
Heaven will not consist of some one or two magnificent jewels, as does
the crown of many glorious Martyrs, but of countless little gems, each
shining with its own peculiar lustre. These are the lessons we should
learn from the private life of the God incarnate.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                      On the Public Life of Christ


_1st Prelude._ Recall the facts: Christ began His public labors for the
salvation of souls by leaving His Blessed Mother, by being baptized
among sinners, then fasting forty days. Next He travelled on foot from
town to town during three years, in great poverty, through Galilee and
Judea; selected ignorant men as His Apostles, instructed them most
patiently, and predicted His sacred passion.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold Christ, attended by His Apostles, while He
addresses a miscellaneous multitude.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask earnestly that you may learn from Him an intense zeal
for souls and generosity in following His example.

_POINT I._ Consider the grandeur of the work of saving souls. It is the
noblest occupation possible, as is expressed in the maxim attributed to
St. Dionysius the Areopagite: “The most Divine of all Divine works is
the salvation of souls.” In fact the saving of one soul is a higher
achievement than the creation of the material universe; for the value of
an action is properly measured by the result achieved, and a glorified
soul is as far above all bodily substances as the knowledge, love and
fruition of God is above mere matter. We admire the poet who composes a
grand epic, the painter or sculptor who produces a masterpiece of his
noble art, the architect who erects an imposing structure, etc.; but
what is all this compared to the salvation of a soul, that will be for
eternity an ornament of Heaven. To Christ belongs the glory of all
salvation of souls, but He deigns to share this glory with His
followers, to whom He says: “I have chosen you and have appointed you
that you should go and bring forth fruit and that your fruit should
remain” (St. John xv, 16).

What a noble object to work for! And while a soul is so precious, its
salvation is to be effected in a short time. We may at times achieve
this wonderful success in a single hour.

_POINT II._ Consider the example set us by the Son of God to accomplish
this purpose: 1. He left His Blessed Mother, and we do not read that He
ever returned to her home. This ought to encourage us to make similar
sacrifices. 2. He so humbled Himself as to be baptized among sinners;
and, to call down the blessings of Heaven upon His sacred ministry, He
spent forty days in fasting and prayer. By all this He taught us that
the supernatural work of saving souls is to be accomplished by the
supernatural means of humiliations and penance and prayer; mere
eloquence and logic are not sufficient. 3. He endured many privations.
For during those three years He and His Apostles had not the comforts of
a home: “The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests, but the
son of man hath not where to lay his head” (St. Matth. viii, 20). They
often spent the night in the open air, for instance in the Garden of
Olives. They had no regular supply of food, and must often have endured
bitter hunger. St. Matthew narrates an instance: “At that time Jesus
went through the corn on the Sabbath; and His disciples being hungry
began to pluck the ears and to eat them” (xii, 1). He travelled and
taught the people all day and received visitors during the night, like
Nicodemus and Joseph of Arithmathea, who were His disciples secretly for
fear of the Jews.

The history of the Saints is full of similar hardships; for they had
learned to follow His example. Am I a worthy follower of my King? Do I
make generous sacrifices in His service? Frequently the salvation or the
loss of a soul depends on the zeal of a priest or religious. Neglect in
this matter is often irreparable.

_POINT III._ During His public life Jesus also gave us the example of
earnest prayer, in which He would at times spend the entire night. St.
Luke writes: “He (Jesus) went out into a mountain to pray, and he passed
the whole night in the prayer of God” (vi, 12). He did not need to pray
for His own sake, but He wished to show us by His example the necessity
of fervent prayer for those employed in the active duty of saving souls.
They need it for themselves and for the good of others. For themselves,
because the sacred ministry is full of dangers; it is like striving to
save drowning men, in which task those who lend assistance often perish
themselves. Sad experience teaches that many priests, employed in
constant labors, neglect their own souls, and come to a miserable fall.
And as far as the neighbor is concerned, it is the man of prayer, the
man of God, that does the work of God, and not the priest of a worldly
mind who neglects his prayer.

With what devotion do I offer the holy sacrifice of the Mass? receive
Holy Communion? make my meditation? recite the Divine Office? The annual
retreat is the time to consider all these things and to provide for
improvements.

_Colloquy_ with our Dear Lord, praying for an increase of fervor in
prayer, of zeal for souls, of generosity in the labors of the ministry.




                             THE SIXTH DAY


After we have meditated on the Kingdom of Christ, His self-annihilation,
His private life and His zealous labors, we must now consider the plots
and efforts of the archenemy Satan, who opposes Him at every point. For
life is a continuous warfare: “The life of man upon earth is a warfare,”
says Job; and in every war there are of course two opposing forces. St.
Augustine in his celebrated work on “The City of God,” compared together
the working of those conflicting powers, the impersonations of virtue
and vice, of humility and pride. St. Ignatius here proposes a similar
parable, for the purpose of discovering the plots and snares of Satan to
ruin souls, contrasting them with Christ’s plans and labors to procure
their eternal happiness.


                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
                          On the Two Standards


_1st Prelude._ The figure under which the two opposing forces are
presented by St. Ignatius is that of two armies encamped, the one near
Babylon, the city of confusion, as the name signifies; the other near
Jerusalem, that sacred city of peace. In the former camp Satan is seen
elevated on a throne of fire and smoke, his countenance horrible to
behold. He is surrounded by countless demons, whom he is instructing how
to compass the ruin of souls. In the other camp the Blessed Saviour
stands humbly in the midst of His followers, Angels and men, His
countenance beaming with kindness, while teaching them how to gain all
hearts for virtue and happiness.

_2nd Prelude._ Imagine you behold these two camps with their respective
leaders.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask for light to understand the treacherous schemes of
Satan, that you may oppose them in yourself and in others, and may lead
all to obey Christ.

_POINT I._ Study the special features of Satan’s camp.

1. It is near Babylon, where the tower of Babel once stood, to signify
the pride and the confusion which Satan ever labors to stir up in the
hearts of men. He is elevated on a throne, to denote the ambition he
arouses in all to rise above their fellows. The throne consists of
flames, ever restless, and smoke, darkening the mind of his miserable
dupes. His monstrous features reflect the ugly vices of his heart.

2. Listen to his address: “Go into every country, every province, every
city, town and hamlet, enter into every house, and tempt every man,
woman and child to grasp for the good things of this world. Most of them
are easily enticed to the greed of money and riches, the accumulation of
which seems to them reasonable and proper.

“When they become rich, tempt them to the ambition of honor, by which
they are puffed up with self-esteem and the spirit of independence of
God.” This spirit is the very essence of pride, and the subversion of
the moral order. The world is full of minds independent of God; they are
the conquests of Satan. Beginning with what appears proper enough, they
are gradually led to the abyss of sin.

3. The demon understands full well that the temptation is to be adapted
to each one’s character. With many there is from the beginning an
inordinate love of honor and distinction; these may at once be assailed
on their weak point and more rapidly led into pride. Others are more
readily allured by the bait of pleasure; they may first be tempted by
innocent amusements, then by more inordinate enjoyment, till they cast
off all restraint, loving self to the contempt of the Creator, which is
but another form of pride.

_POINT II._ Now consider the opposing camp.

1. There behold the gentle Saviour, not enthroned, but humbly standing
in the midst of His followers, as it were an equal to the least. His
serene countenance is lit by a genial smile, inspiring all with love and
confidence;

“Beautiful above the sons of men, grace is poured abroad in thy
lips—Thou hast loved justice and hated iniquity; therefore God, thy God,
hath annointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows” (Ps.
44).

2. Listen to the instructions He gives to His Angels and the human
ministers of His mercy. He says: “Go ye into the whole world, to every
country, every province, every city, town and hamlet, enter every house,
and induce every man, woman, and child to labor for their eternal
happiness, by the practice of self-restraint and moderation in all their
desires; let all be satisfied with a decent competency of wealth,
detaching their hearts from earthly possessions, so as to acquire
poverty of spirit, and to be ready to embrace even actual poverty, if
the spirit of God should be pleased to lead them to that perfection.
Induce them next to willingness to be slighted, even despised, so as to
resemble Me more closely. The result will be true humility, which is the
root of all the virtues.”

_Colloquy_, first with your Mother Mary, asking her to obtain from her
Divine Son, true poverty of spirit, and willingness to become actually
poor, if God should wish it. Then ask the Saviour through His love for
Mary, as man, to obtain these graces for you from His Heavenly Father.
Lastly ask the Father to grant you the same through His love for His
Divine Son. This triple colloquy is a powerful prayer.


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                    On the Three Degrees of Humility


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold Christ, who says to you: “My son, I
will now show you the highest point of perfection to which I desire you
to aspire for the present.”

_2nd Prelude._ Speak, O Lord, Thy servant heareth. Give me the grace of
generously complying with Thy invitation.

_POINT I._ _The first degree_ of virtue, also called the first degree of
humility, consists in such a disposition of heart, such firm attachment
to our good Lord, that nothing in the world, not even the danger of
death, can make us even deliberate about committing a mortal sin. This
degree is necessary for all men, it is the habitual state of all good
Christians. Weakness or passion may sometimes cause them to fall; but
they soon rise again, and return to this state of mind. It is in fact
simply the application of the words of Christ: “If thy right hand
scandalize thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into unquenchable fire”
(St. Mark ix, 42). Let us thank God that we have attained this degree at
least; but let us also consider whether any passion is so unrestrained
within us as to expose us to a serious fall. No man is safe as long as
he lives; some make a sad failure in the end. They fare like the vessel
that came from the New World with loads of gold and silver on board, and
was wrecked in sight of the Golden Gate, the harbor of San Francisco,
while its sailors were answering the hurrahs of welcome rising from the
crowd of spectators on the shore.

_POINT II._ _The second degree_ consists in such an habitual state of
mind that we would rather do or suffer anything, even rather die, than
enter into deliberation about committing even a wilful venial sin. This
degree supposes considerable indifference to the good things or the
evils of this world. It is the habitual state of fervent religious; they
may be surprised into venial sins, but they rarely commit them with full
deliberation. Let us try to establish ourselves firmly in this degree;
and if we find difficulty in this, let us pray most earnestly for help,
and do ourselves violence. “The Kingdom of heaven suffereth violence,
and the violent bear it away” (St. Matth. xi, 12). We should not rest
satisfied till, by prayer and efforts, we have confirmed ourselves in
this degree.

_POINT III._ _The third degree_ consists in such devoted attachment to
our Blessed Saviour that we wish to be like Him, to be in suffering and
forgotten, or even despised by men, as He was; so that, where duty does
not require the contrary, we wish, even without a view to any reward, to
share His afflictions, for no other reason than because Christ, our
dearest friend and Sovereign Lord endured the same.

Thus when a member of a decent family is in a dying condition, all the
other members abstain from feasting or attending pleasure parties; so
too, because our Lord led a poor and humble life, enduring intense
hardships and sufferings, we wish to bear a share in His afflictions.

As an accomplished artist takes great delight in practising his art, in
which a beginner finds only labor and difficulties, so those derive most
happiness from the practice of virtue who have attained in it uncommon
proficiency. The sentiments of this third degree are beautifully
expressed in the Prayer of St. Xavier, “O Deus: ego amo te,” etc. (page
132).

_The colloquy_ is three-fold: 1. Begging the Blessed Virgin to obtain
for us from her Divine Son the grace of frequently eliciting acts of
this third degree. 2. Begging our Divine Lord to ask this grace for us
from His Heavenly Father. 3. Begging our Heavenly Father to grant us the
same, through the love He has for His Divine Son.


                             CONSIDERATION
                             On Temptations


In the meditation on the Two Standards we studied the manner in which
the evil spirit tempts the souls of men, leading them from apparently
innocent beginnings to total independence of their Creator. We must now
consider the subject of temptations in further detail.


                                   I


_Why does the Devil hate men?_ Because he hates God, and as he cannot
injure God, he wreaks his vengeance on God’s images and children. Now
man is created in the image of God, and all men are, or at least are
destined to be, elevated to the dignity of children of God. Besides,
they are intended to occupy in Heaven the thrones which the evil angels
have lost. Therefore Satan envies them, and wants to ruin them by every
means in his power. The chief means is mortal sin, by which a man joins
in with the tempter in rebelling against his Sovereign Lord. If Satan
cannot succeed in leading us into mortal sin, he will strive to impair
at least the beauty of the soul by venial sin, and worry it to deprive
it of the peace of God.

God allows all this to happen that man may be further ennobled by his
victories over temptations and be more richly rewarded; also that the
power of the Lord may be more and more manifested, when He enables so
weak a being as man to triumph over such powerful spirits. Thus
Providence draws good out of evil, and the wisdom, power, and goodness
of God are glorified, virtue is perfected in infirmity (II Cor. xii, 9),
and the free creature is exalted. This is beautifully explained in the
book of Tobias: “Thy counsel is not in man’s power. But this every man
is sure of that worshippeth thee, that his life, if it be under trial,
shall be crowned; and if it be under tribulation it shall be delivered,
and if it be under correction, it shall be allowed to come to thy mercy:
because after a storm, thou makest a calm, and after tears and weeping
thou pourest in joyfulness. Be thy name, O God of Israel, blessed
forever” (iii, 20-23).


                                   II


_All must expect to be tried by temptations_; for the Lord assures us:
“the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and the violent bear it away”
(St. Matth. xi, 12); now our indolence tempts us to shirk this violence.
Our Blessed Saviour allowed Himself to be tempted, and we are to be made
like unto Him: “The disciple is not above his master” (ib. x, 24). Those
who aim at a closer resemblance to their Divine Master must expect to be
more violently tempted; and therefore Ecclesiasticus warns us: “Son,
when thou comest to the service of God, stand in justice and in fear,
and prepare thy soul for temptation. Humble thy heart and endure” (ii,
1). In fact those who please God must be tempted; the two things are
inseparable, as the Angel explained to Tobias: “Because thou wast
acceptable to God, it was necessary that temptation should prove thee”
(xii, 13). Read the lives of the Saints, and you will not find one who
had not to endure severe temptations, from St. Paul and the other
Apostles down to the latest Saint.


                                  III


_God will not allow us to be tempted above our strength_, as He has
graciously promised through St. Paul, who writes: “God is faithful, who
will not allow you to be tempted above that which you are able, but will
make also with temptation issue that you may be able to bear it” (I Cor.
x, 13). This truth is strikingly illustrated by the history of Job,
which is graphically told thus, in poetic language: “On a certain day,
when the sons of God came to stand before the Lord, Satan also was
present among them. And the Lord said to him: Hast thou considered my
servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a simple and
upright man, and fearing God and avoiding evil? And Satan answering
said: Does Job fear God in vain? Hast thou not made a fence for him and
his house, and all his substance round about, blessed the work of his
hands, and his possession hath increased on the earth? But stretch forth
thy hand a little, and touch all that he hath, and see if he blesseth
thee not to thy face. Then the Lord said to Satan: Behold all that he
hath is in thy hand, only put not forth thy hand upon his person.” He
thus allowed Satan to deprive Job of his possessions, but not to go any
further. We all know how Satan carried out this permission to the
letter, and took away in one day all that Job enjoyed, his sons and
daughters included, so that he exclaimed: “Naked came I out of my
mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither, the Lord gave, and the
Lord hath taken away; as it hath pleased to the Lord so it is done,” and
he added with perfect resignation: “Blessed be the name of the Lord” (i,
6-22). Next, Satan obtains power from God to afflict Job in his health,
yet so as to spare his life; God controls all. “So Satan went forth from
the face of the Lord, and struck Job with a very grievous ulcer, from
the sole of the foot to the top of his head. And he took a potsherd, and
scraped the corrupt matter, sitting on a dunghill. And his wife said to
him: Dost thou still continue in thy simplicity? bless God and die, and
he said to her: Thou hast spoken like one of the foolish women; if we
have received good things at the hand of God, why should we not receive
evil? In all these things Job did not sin with his lips” (ii, 7, 8).

Such is the grand example of patience that Job gave for all subsequent
ages. After his trials were ended, the Lord rewarded him abundantly in
his wealth and in the excellence of his later children; “and Job lived
after these things a hundred and forty years, and he saw his children
and his children’s children unto the fourth generation, and he died an
old man and full of years.” In the New Law, in which we live, the
rewards of patience are far more precious than those here mentioned in
the case of Job; for “The sufferings of this time,” says St. Paul, “are
not worthy to be compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed
in us” (Rom. viii, 18). And St. James writes: “Blessed is the man that
endureth temptations; for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the
crown of life which God hath promised to them that love Him” (i, 12).


                                   IV


We must remember, however, that _not all our temptations are from the
evil spirit_. He is wicked enough to cause them all; but he need not do
so. Of course they never come from God; for St. James says: “Let no man,
when he is tempted, say that he is tempted by God; for God is not a
tempter of evils, and He tempts no man. But every man is tempted by his
own concupiscence, being drawn away and allured” (i, 13-14).

As concupiscence belongs to our fallen nature, it cannot be altogether
suppressed; but its power can be very much increased or diminished; and
therefore the temptations it causes are to a considerable extent under
our own control. If a St. Aloysius, a St. Stanislaus and many other
chaste youths scarcely felt any rebellions of the flesh, it was due in
great part to the care with which they had from their early childhood
guarded the gates of their senses, their eyes, their ears, their touch;
and instead of flattering them, they had constantly mortified them in
various ways. On the other hand, very many persons allow themselves
liberties of an indelicate nature; these need not wonder why they find
it so difficult to lead chaste lives.

However, even the most mortified souls may be severely tempted to carnal
sins; thus we read of St. Anthony, that, even in his frightful desert,
he was one day assailed by such temptations; and when the victory was
won, he exclaimed: Lord where wast Thou when those vile images beset my
mind? And the Lord answered him: Anthony, I was in the midst of your
heart. But the danger of the sin is certainly much greater when a person
is, partly at least, the cause of such disorderly affections, when he
heaps fuel on the fire of concupiscence.

It is well to ask oneself in a retreat: have I anything to reproach
myself with in this respect? How do I habitually observe modesty of the
eyes in public and in private? Is my reading always proper and prudent?
Do I ever indulge indolence or excessive softness? am I perfectly
temperate in food and drink, and thus cautious not to arouse dangerous
passions? It is necessary to ask the Lord frequently and fervently:
“Lead us not into temptation”; but this will be of little avail if we
bring on temptations by our own laxity or imprudence.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                      On the Three Classes of men


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold Christ before you, looking kindly upon
you, and saying: “My son, give me thy heart” (Prov. xxxiii).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask fervently for light to understand this gracious
invitation, and strength to comply with it generously.

_POINT I._ While this invitation is really addressed by our loving Lord
to every man, consider how differently it is responded to by various
classes of men.

_The first class_, which unfortunately is very numerous, turn a deaf ear
to this appeal. They are so taken up with the vanities or the pleasures
of the world, with the pursuit of riches or honor or friendships, that
they do not even stop to consider the call of grace. The turmoil of
their passions drowns the still voice of conscience, and they rush on to
the yawning abyss of eternal loss. Let me thank the Lord that He has
prevented me by His loving care from running along in this mad career.

_POINT II._ The second class of men listen to the Divine call,
appreciate its infinite condescension, fly from the allurements of the
grossest vices, and give their hearts to their Sovereign Master. Yet
they do not give their whole heart. A part of it is occupied by some
cherished creature, which they will not sacrifice to their loving Lord.
We read that when St. Sebastian was trying to convert a Roman nobleman,
named Croatius, he promised him a cure from a painful disease as soon as
he should receive Baptism; for Sebastian worked many miracles. But he
required as a necessary condition that Croatius should destroy all the
idols he had in his house. After the Baptism the convert complained that
his sickness was not removed. It was found that he had not destroyed one
little idol of gold, an old heirloom in the family; and only after this
also was given up was the cure obtained. Thus very many souls are kept
back from perfection by some cherished idol which they hesitate to
resign.

In the world some men are estimable citizens, honest, charitable, but
neglectful of religious duties; others are even practical Catholics,
except that they neglect Confession. All such are in evident danger of
dying in their sins and being lost forever; but passion blinds them to
their terrible danger. Among religious no great vice is common, but many
are held back from attaining perfection by some human attachment, or by
some evil habit, which they refuse, or hesitate to abandon altogether.

Is there any sacrifice that I know, or at least suspect, my dear Lord
asks of me? Is there any practice or habit of mine that may not please
Him? If a sculptor, carving an elegant statue, would find a flaw in the
marble that would disfigure the countenance, he might have to reject
that stone and choose another. The Divine Artist is forming my soul into
an image of Christ; happily, if He finds a flaw in my soul, He can
remove it, but He will not do so without my consent; or rather He will
not remove it Himself, but aid me to remove it. Is there such a flaw?
Are there perhaps more than one? Speak, O Lord, Thy servant heareth.

_POINT III._ _The third class of men_ to whom the Lord says, “Son, give
me thy heart,” answer promptly and generously: “O Lord! I wish to be all
thine”; “For what have I in Heaven? and besides Thee what do I desire
upon earth? For Thee my flesh and my heart hath fainted away; Thou art
the God of my heart, and the God that is my portion forever” (Ps. 72).
But of course virtue does not consist in fine sentiments alone. Docile
to the invitation of Christ, we must so give Him our hearts that we are
willing to satisfy all His desires. “What shall I render to the Lord for
all the things that He hath rendered to me?” (Ps. 115).

I am now come to the end of the second week of the Exercises. Its main
purpose was the study of Christ’s private and public life, so as to make
myself like unto Him. This therefore is the proper time to examine
whether there is any trait of my Divine model which I am not yet
determined to reproduce in my own soul.

Here St. Ignatius introduces the election of a state of life for those
who have not yet entered on a permanent career; and from those who have
he expects a reformation of life. Now this is best accomplished by
comparing our own hearts with that of our Divine pattern, taking most
generous resolutions to remove all flaws and supply all deficiencies.

_Colloquy._ O my dear Mother Mary! I beg of thee to obtain for me from
thy Divine Son the grace of following His example in the practice of all
the virtues, doing whatever He may desire of me and that at any
sacrifice. Oh, dearest Lord! by Thy love for Thy Blessed Mother, obtain
for me, this precious grace from Thy Heavenly Father. And Thou, my
Supreme Lord and Master, God the Father, grant me this entire
devotedness at the prayer of Thy Divine Son.




                            THE SEVENTH DAY


Here we begin the Third Week of St. Ignatius’ Exercises; it is devoted
to the consideration of Christ’s sacred passion. These meditations, or
contemplations, are a tribute of love that we offer to our dear Lord;
and they are suggestive to ourselves of generous sentiments, and earnest
resolutions to practise even heroic virtue, in following our beloved
King to the height of His self-sacrifice. By the light and grace they
impart, they aid us to advance rapidly in the way of perfection.

We read in the Life and Revelations of St. Gertrude (p. 348) that she
beheld one day our Blessed Lord as He was after He had been whipped at
the pillar, covered with wounds, and she asked Him, tenderly: “Alas,
Lord, what remedy can we find to sooth Thy agonizing pains?” Our Lord
replied: “The most efficacious and tenderest remedy you can prepare for
Me is to meditate on My passion, and to pray charitably for the
conversion of sinners.” It is in this spirit that all the exercises of
this day should be performed.


                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
               On the Sufferings of Christ in the Garden


_1st Prelude._ Read the 26th chapter of St. Matthew’s Gospel, from the
30th to the 57th verse.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold Christ prostrate in the prayer of His agony.

_3rd Prelude._ Beg grace to condole with Him and to suffer patiently and
generously.

_POINT I._ Consider Christ’s entrance into the garden.

_The persons_: Christ, my Saviour, goes to suffer for me. The fact then
regards me personally, I cannot be indifferent to its details. He
selects Peter, John and James to witness His agony. Thus the severest
trials come to God’s favorites. Christ has prepared them for this trial
of their faith by the vision of His glory on Mount Thabor. Thus He
provides special aids for special difficulties. All the Apostles have
been strengthened for the occasion by Holy Communion. A fall soon after
receiving Communion does not prove an unworthy Communion.

_The words._ Peter said: “Although all should be scandalized in thee, I
will never be scandalized.” Pride goes before a fall. “Jesus said to
him: Amen, I say to thee that, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me
thrice.” Christ saith to his Apostles: “My soul is sorrowful even unto
death.” We should not then be discouraged if we shrink from suffering,
and are saddened by them.

_The actions._ Jesus prepares for the conflict by betaking Himself to
prayer. I must do the same in trials.

_POINT II._ _The agony._ _The words_: “My Father, if it be possible, let
this chalice pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou
wilt.” It is then perfectly proper to pray for deliverance from the
cross; but we must ever add submission to God’s holy will: “Not my will
but thine be done.”

_The actions_: “He cometh to his disciples, and findeth them asleep.” We
are not then forbidden to seek for consolation from our fellow-men; but
we shall usually be disappointed; like Jesus, we must return to prayer.
He prayed again, “saying the self-same words.” We should not try to be
eloquent in prayer, but dwell on a few thoughts or sentiments. We can
have no better model of prayer than we have here before us. The Apostles
neglected their opportunity; hence their cowardice.

_POINT III. The treason of Judas. The persons._ The Son of God is meanly
betrayed by one of His own Apostles. How is the gold obscured! When
favorite souls fall away, they often fall the deepest. How did he come
to this? From small beginnings, by little thefts at first. One passion
left unchecked is enough to ruin the noblest character. All the passions
are in every one of us, and need constant watching.

_The words._ “Hail Rabbi.” What hypocrisy! “Friend, whereunto art thou
come?” Christ still loved the wretch, and kindly wished to bring him
back to his duty. That is the charity of my model. Is mine like His?

_The actions._ He receives the kiss of the traitor and shows no
indignation. Then Christ lets Himself be seized and bound like a
criminal, and He abandons Himself into the hands of His enemies,
recognizing in them the executers of His Father’s will. “Then the
disciples, all leaving him, fled”; and yet all of them had said with
Peter that they were ready to go with Him even to death. It is not
boasting, but praying we need.

_Colloquy_, thanking our dear Lord for His generous love for us, asking
that we may know and love Him better and follow Him more perfectly.

_Notice_ that the thoughts here expressed are only suggestions and need
not be entertained. The exercitant is apt to be most benefited by what
he discovers himself. And when a thought or sentiment strikes him, he
should dwell on it as long as it gives him devotion, and not hasten on
to other matters.


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                On Christ’s Sufferings before His Judges


_1st Prelude._ Christ was dragged from court to court, everywhere loaded
with false accusations; but He opened not His mouth. He was dressed in a
fool’s garment, cruelly scourged and crowned with thorns, and bore all
patiently. Exposed to the sight of the multitude, He saw a robber
preferred to Him, was rejected by His people and condemned to the death
of the cross.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold Christ with His hands tied like a criminal,
standing before the tribunal of Caiphas.

_3rd Prelude._ My dear Lord, grant me deep sorrow for Thy sufferings and
for my sins, by which I have repaid Thy infinite love.

_POINT I. Christ is falsely accused._ Consider:

_The persons._ The judges presume to sit in judgment on Him who has
proved Himself to be the Son of God. Our sins, like theirs, are often
far more serious than we are willing to acknowledge to ourselves. We
blind ourselves. Caiphas did so by claiming that it was “expedient that
one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not”
(St. John xi, 50). This was true, but not in the sense the high priest
gave to it. Do I ever judge my neighbor unjustly? perhaps even my
superiors?

The witnesses little think how wicked their accusations are, leading to
the crime of deicide: “The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity” (St.
James iii, 6). Meanwhile Christ is silent, to teach us how to suffer;
silence under accusations, true or false, is usually better than the
most eloquent defense. Isaias had predicted: “He shall be dumb as a lamb
before his hearers, and he shall not open his mouth” (liii, 7). He only
spoke when the honor of God required it, as when the high priest said:
“I conjure thee by the living God that thou tell us if thou be the
Christ, the Son of God. Jesus said to them: Thou has said it.
Nevertheless I say to you, hereafter you shall see the son of man
sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming in the clouds
of Heaven. They answering said: He is guilty of death” (St. Matth. xxvi,
63-66). What injustice! This is often repeated to-day by those who hate
the Church; we must wait patiently for the time of its glorification.

_POINT II. Dressed in a fool’s garment, scourged, crowned with thorns._
Behold the humiliations, the cruel sufferings patiently endured by the
Redeemer, as an expiation of your own sins. Try to realize the details
of the torments heaped upon Him. That flagellation was borne to expiate
sins of the body. Do I practise bodily mortification enough? Soft
members are out of place in the mystic body of Christ. He is crowned
with thorns; do I look for honors and laurel crowns? He is decked in
mockery with a rag of purple; do I delight in vain display? Lord, make
me like unto thee.

_POINT III._ Pilate shows Him to the people: “_Ecco homo_,” “Behold the
man.” Let me observe Him well, noticing every indignity inflicted on
Him. His head crowned with thorns, His face defiled with spittle, every
visible portion of His sacred body livid with bruises and stained with
clotted blood: “A worm and no man, the reproach of men and the outcast
of the people” (Ps. 21), “Despised and the most abject of men, a man of
sorrows” (Is. liii, 3).

_The words_: “Give us Barabbas and take Jesus away.” How can I complain
when others are preferred to me? “Let him be crucified”; “His blood be
upon us and upon our children.” How fearfully has this curse been
carried into effect. Behold the whole Jewish race struck with spiritual
blindness for already nineteen centuries, in the midst of nations blest
with the light of faith. How this ruin of His nation must have grieved
the heart of the Redeemer. Pilate vainly tries to disclaim his
responsibility for the deicide: “I am innocent of the death of this just
man.” So we may deceive ourselves, wilfully. Am I always honest in my
pretences?

_The actions._ Pilate delivers Christ to be crucified. This is the price
paid for every soul, the death of Christ. How precious is a soul! The
blood of Christ is the atonement of sin; what a terrible evil is sin!

_Colloquy_ with Jesus, as He stands there condemned to an ignominious
death; indulging the sentiments aroused by the meditation.


                             CONSIDERATION
                  On Generosity in the Service of God


When we performed the meditation on the Kingdom of Christ, we imagined a
very noble prince, who, at the call of God, abandoned all other pursuits
to devote himself to the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth,
and summoned all brave souls to rally under his standard for this
exalted purpose. We next considered that this parable was not a mere
creation of the fancy, but was a fit expression of a grand reality. For
such a noble prince did actually appear on earth, one far nobler than we
could have conceived possible, the Son of God Himself, come down to
establish the Kingdom of His Father in the hearts of men, and thus
prepare them to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. At this summons we
resolved to follow Him, and we have really left all things for that
purpose, and our highest ambition now is to follow Him most closely by
making ourselves as like to Him as, with God’s grace, may be possible.

To accomplish this purpose, we have been studying His example, from the
moment of His incarnation, through His birth, childhood, His private and
His public life, till we have seen Him deliver Himself into the hands of
His enemies, submit to the most shocking indignities and torments; and
all this through love for us, paying the penalties of our sins in His
own Person, to save us from Hell and make us share His glory. The most
appropriate term to express all this devotedness is “boundless
generosity.” This is the most striking characteristic of our glorious
King.

As we are earnestly striving to make ourselves like to Him, we will now
consider the excellence of the virtue of generosity; and we do so by
preference on this day on which we are meditating on the sacrifices by
which Christ’s generosity was exhibited in the most impressive manner.

Among natural qualities in man generosity is the noblest, among the
supernatural virtues it is the highest, because it is the most Godlike.
Charity, the love of God, and of the neighbor for the love of God, is
the most perfect virtue, and generosity is the perfection of charity.
The highest manifestation that God has made of Himself is twofold, the
creation and the incarnation with all its consequences. He created to
pour out happiness on other beings, all manners of good things on
created natures; He became incarnate to bestow _Himself_ on them; and He
did so even after they had forfeited their primal destiny. Thus too a
man by the practice of generosity gives of his own to others, by
supernatural generosity he gives himself entirely to God and to others
for the sake of God.

When we give to our neighbor what we owe him, we practise the virtue of
justice; when we give to God the honor we owe Him, we practise the
virtue of religion, which is a species of justice; but we practice the
virtue of generosity when we give more than the Lord demands of us, and
thereby we more closely resemble God, on whom we have no claim and who
yet gave us all we have.

The proper esteem, as well as the practice of this virtue, is taught us
by the grand mysteries on which we meditate to-day. In fact these
lessons have been excellently learned by the followers of Christ
throughout all the ages of Christianity. See how His Apostles, to a man,
gave their whole lives and finally shed their blood, as Jesus had done,
for the honor of God, and the salvation of souls.

The same was done by thousands of other followers in after generations
and is continued to be done till the present day. Countless solitaries
of both sexes, and monks and nuns and missionaries among the heathens
have left all things and thus imitated the generosity of the Redeemer.
Sacrifice for the same glorious cause is written large over the history
of the Church in every age and every land.

It is this spirit of generous sacrifice that we must to-day rekindle in
our hearts. We should not now ask ourselves merely, as we did properly
some days ago, is there any sacrifice I _am bound_ to make if I want to
save my immortal soul? but, at the sight of Jesus mocked and scourged,
and crowned with thorns and dying like a criminal upon the cross, and
all this for my sins, let me ask myself generously, “what sacrifices
_can_ I make to God to show my gratitude?”

These sentiments aroused in St. Ignatius, as under the guidance of the
Holy Spirit he performed the Spiritual Exercises at Manresa, an ambition
beautifully expressed in the motto he selected for his Society _Ad
Majorem Dei Gloriam_, “For the Greater Glory of God.” For he became so
enraptured with the love of Christ that he longed only to sacrifice
himself entirely for the honor of God, and to rally around him a
generous band of men who should be aglow with the same Divine
enthusiasm.

This spirit of generosity, so characteristic of St. Ignatius, is clearly
manifested in the Constitutions which he drew up for the guidance and
the government of his Society. The whole spirit of his institute is a
spirit of generous devotion to the service of God and the good of men.
For instance, he wants his followers to be so little attached to their
country, or to any place whatever, that they shall be willing to go and
live in any part of the world where there is hope of God’s greater
service and the help of souls. They must leave father and mother,
sisters and brothers and whatsoever they had in the world. They must so
far resign their right to a good name as to allow all their errors and
defects to be manifested to their superiors. They are even urged to wish
to suffer reproaches, slanders and injuries, and to be treated and
accounted as fools, so as to resemble Jesus Christ, and in all things to
seek their greater abnegation and continual mortification. In the
exercise of low and mean offices they must be willing to be employed in
such as are more abhorrent to nature.

Certainly all these rules and practices suppose an uncommon degree of
generosity. And yet the Saint insists on them, and urges his followers
to labor constantly that no point of perfection which by God’s grace
they can attain in the perfect observance of his Constitutions, be
omitted by them. In all things they are to seek God, casting off, as
much as is possible, the love of creatures, that they may set all their
affections on the Creator.

As to the general spirit of his Society, it is hard to conceive how this
could be more generous than it actually is; and no less generosity is
seen when the rules descend to practical details. Consider, for
instance, the strict interpretation they put on the understanding of the
religious vows. They make poverty a total privation of the right to
dispose of anything at one’s will or discretion, neither allowing one to
give nor to receive, to lend nor to borrow any object whatever without
permission of the superior.

For the measure and the pattern of the vow of chastity nothing less is
proposed than the purity of the blessed Angels in Heaven. To protect
this virtue a Jesuit has to submit himself all the days of his life to
such careful surveillance as solicitous parents exercise over their
daughters, who are not allowed to go outside the house without
permission, nor, as far as circumstances allow, without the attendance
of a discreet companion.

It is especially with regard to the vow and the virtue of obedience that
generosity is carried to its highest perfection. Not only every command
of a superior is to be obeyed, but even every hint of his will is to be
complied with, every token of his wishes; and this is to be done
promptly, without excuse, without reluctance of the will, without
disagreement of the judgment. And in all these observances no one can
claim exemption or privilege on account of high offices formerly held,
on account of great learning or unusual ability or for any other
consideration.

With such precepts and examples before me, what can I do better than to
lead henceforth a life of constant generosity? Let me pause to consider
carefully and prayerfully what sacrifices in particular I can offer.
Speak, Lord! Thy servant heareth; there is nothing I will refuse. Give
me the grace of doing what Thou desirest, and ask what Thou wilt.

When our Divine Lord appeared to five of His Apostles after His
resurrection, He took St. Peter aside and asked him: “Simon, son of
John, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him: Yea Lord, thou
knowest that I love thee; He saith to him: Feed my lambs—Feed my sheep.”
As if He had said: You cannot show Me your love better than by feeding
My lambs and My sheep. And thus we too cannot give to Christ a more
acceptable proof of our love than that of working for the salvation of
souls, the lambs and sheep for which He shed the last drop of His sacred
blood. How am I performing that holy task? The question just now is not:
am I doing my full duty in the exercise of the sacred ministry? but, can
I do any more than I have done so far, or than I am actually doing for
the good of immortal souls? Can I undertake any more work and remain
within the bounds of discretion? Or at least can I perform my tasks with
more care and devotedness? And can I pray more fervently to draw down
God’s blessing on my labors?

There is still another way in which we can successfully exercise our
zeal for souls, namely by praying and working for the increase of the
number of laborers in Christ’s vineyard. St. Matthew tells us that,
“Seeing the multitudes Christ had compassion on them, because they were
distressed and lying like sheep that have no shepherd. Then he said to
his disciples: The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few.
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he send laborers into his
harvest” (ix, 36-38).

Undoubtedly such prayers are daily going up to Heaven asking for more
sacred laborers, and in response God is constantly furnishing His Church
with new accessions to the number of her ministers. If our prayers were
more abundant and more fervent and our efforts more earnest, we could
obtain still more. Here too is room for more generous exertions.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                         On the Death of Christ


_1st Prelude._ Christ carried His cross a weary way up the mountain,
falling repeatedly beneath it. Arrived at the top, He is despoiled of
His garments, and stands there a pillar of bleeding flesh. He is most
rudely nailed to the cross, which is next lifted up, and dropped with a
shock into its socket. His hands and feet are torn around the nails. He
exclaims: “Father, forgive them,” says to St. John: “Behold thy mother,”
exclaims “Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit!” and expires. His
sacred Heart is pierced.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold Christ hanging on the cross, amid the jeers of His
triumphant enemies. He is praying for us all.

_3rd Prelude._ Beg for a loving compassion for His pains and for a deep
sorrow for sin.

_POINT I._ Consider how Christ painfully carries His cross. He thus
shows us the one way to Heaven, that of suffering. There would have been
another way, that of innocence, by which the Angels had entered; but it
was closed by the sin of Adam and by our own sins. Now we must all
suffer, here or hereafter. The lookers on were of three classes: His
enemies, rejoicing; His friends sorrowing; the crowd, indifferent. It is
so to-day. The falls of Christ represent our moral falls; these must
humble, but not discourage us. He meets His blessed Mother: sufferings
bring us nearer to Mary. Condole with her.

_POINT II._ Christ is despoiled of His garments, that He may die in the
utmost poverty, in which He has also been born. His clothes cling to His
torn flesh, and are removed with no tender hands. He bleeds again at
every pore. He is rudely thrown down on the cross; watch the process of
the nailing, of the raising of the cross, of its dropping into the hole
with a rude shock, His sacred flesh tearing about the nails. He
exclaims: “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” What
charity! What an example for us His followers! Again He speaks: “Woman,
behold thy son,” “Behold thy mother.” St. John, the only one of the
Apostles present, represented the Church; in his person we were all
commended to Mary by her dying Son, and we were bidden to hold her as
our Mother.

As Christ hung there on the cross, He viewed and read the hearts of all
men, for whom He died; He thought of me in person. He exclaimed:
“Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit!” and He expired. Let me
resign myself into the hands of God with humble, loving confidence. Let
me thank the Lord for His most precious death, repent of my sins, which
required such expiation, and pray that sinners may be converted.

Let me lovingly kiss the cross, and in spirit bend my head beneath the
stream of His sacred blood, to wash away my sins.

The sacred heart of Jesus is next pierced with a lance, to open that
sanctuary for me and for all sinners. Let me adore that Divine Heart,
and promise to love and honor it, and teach others to do the same.

_Colloquy_ with Jesus, my loving Saviour; with Mary, the Mother of
Sorrows; pleading for pardon, protesting my love and my boundless
gratitude.




                             THE EIGHTH DAY


So far we have followed our King, Jesus Christ, through His
humiliations, labors and sufferings from His incarnation to His cruel
death; we must now follow Him in His glorified life. There too He is
still our leader, by whose side we must triumph, as we have fought by
His side. We must now rejoice with Him. For joy at His exaltation is
worship; and at the same time it encourages us to follow Him generously
and lovingly and to persevere to the end. Such is the purpose of the
Fourth Week of St. Ignatius’s Exercises.


                          THE FIRST MEDITATION
                     On the Resurrection of Christ


_1st Prelude._ The soul of Christ, accompanied by the holy souls from
Limbo, comes to the tomb. He arises glorious. The holy women come to
annoint the body. “He is not here.” Christ appears to His Blessed
Mother, to the penitent Magdalen, to St. Peter, to the devout women.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold the glorified body of the Saviour, as He arises
from the tomb. Imagine the scene.

_3rd Prelude._ Ask to rejoice with Him for His own sake, and to be
thereby encouraged to suffer like Him.

_POINT I._ Behold the scene of His resurrection. First see the lifeless
body, with its gaping wounds and discolored flesh. In union with the
blessed souls, adore it. Then as Christ’s soul enters it, behold how it
is transformed. How different He is now from “the man of sorrows”! His
sacred countenance beams with happiness. Recall His former
transfiguration on Mount Thabor: “His face did shine as the sun, and His
garments became white as snow.” On His head there is still a crown, but
no more of thorns, but now one of glory. His sacred wounds are in His
hands and feet and in His side, but they drip no more with blood, but
pour forth rays of light. Bow down in loving adoration, and in spirit
humbly kiss His feet, and adore your sovereign Lord. Ask Him to bless
you, and to strengthen you to follow in His footsteps.

_POINT II._ Imagine you see the blessed souls proceed, in company with
Christ, to visit the cross, on which He expiated the sins of the world.
Adore the cross, and kiss it lovingly. Bow down and kiss the spot on
which He was nailed to the tree. Next, retracing the way of the cross,
meditate lovingly on His various sufferings.

At last accompany the Lord in spirit as He goes to visit and console His
Blessed Mother. There behold her still seated in the deepest affliction,
the Mother of Sorrows, plunged in an agony of grief, like that which had
made the Saviour exclaim: “Father, if it be possible let this chalice
pass from me.” When suddenly a soft radiance fills the room, and, as she
looks up, she sees before her the glorified form of her Divine Son.
Pause to share in her exceeding joy and love and gratitude. Remember
that thus your sufferings too will one day be exchanged for boundless
bliss.

_POINT III._ Consider how meanwhile the pious women were hastening, at
early dawn, on their way from the city to the tomb, carrying with them
precious ointments to embalm more perfectly the sacred body of their
Lord. They ask one another as they approach the sacred spot: “Who shall
roll us back the stone from the door of the sepulchre? And looking they
saw the stone rolled back. For it was very great” (St. Mark xvi, 3).

Thus it is that we often see difficulties before us, and we see no way
of escape; but a kind Providence brings us unexpected help: “I can do
all things in him who strengtheneth me” wrote St. Paul (Phil. iv, 13).
We should not be too timid when we work for the glory of God.

Still the holy women are not favored with the sight of the Saviour, but
they are sent by the Angel with a message to the Apostles; in due time
Jesus will reward their devotion. “And behold Jesus met them, saying,
All hail, But they came up and took hold of his feet and adored him”
(St. Matth. xxviii, 9). This favor was the reward of their loving
service. Oh! that we could serve the Redeemer as they did! We can do so
by honoring Him in the Blessed Sacrament, visiting Him there, adorning
His altars. We can also do it by serving the poor: “Amen, I say to you:
as long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did it to
me” (Ib. xxv, 40).

The Lord has His own sweet way of encouraging us. Before appearing to
those pious women, He appeared first to St. Mary Magdalen, out of whom
He has cast seven devils; then He appeared to Simon Peter, who had
foresworn Him. Truly Christ had come on earth to save sinners; none of
us should ever despond.

_A loving colloquy_ with our dear Lord, adoring Him, congratulating Him
on His triumphs, in spirit embracing His sacred feet, begging for grace
to walk in His blessed footsteps till we too partake of His glory.


                         THE SECOND MEDITATION
                   On Christ’s Ascension into Heaven


_1st Prelude._ Read Acts, i, 1-11.

_2nd Prelude._ Behold the scene on Mount Olivet, Christ rising above the
crowd of His disciples, every one of whom looks lovingly upwards,
enraptured by the sight of His triumph.

_3rd Prelude._ Beg to rejoice for Christ’s sake, and to be encouraged to
follow your King faithfully to the end.

_POINT I._ Consider 1. _The Persons_: Christ, the former “Man of
Sorrows,” now the conqueror of death, the glorified Lord of Heaven. He
is still our King, leading the army of His followers into the Kingdom of
His Father. I must follow Him on earth, that I may follow Him into
Heaven. By His side stands His blessed Mother, how exultant now in His
triumph! There is the Magdalen, rapt in an ecstasy of joy; St. Peter,
St. John, all His dearest friends, rejoicing at the blissful vision.

2. _The actions._ Christ is ascending Heavenwards, going to take
possession of His Kingdom. All His disciples raise their eyes and their
hands towards His ascending form, and experience a foretaste of that
happiness which is to be their eternal reward.

3. _The circumstances._ Where does Christ ascend? In sight of Calvary.
When? But a few weeks after His dreadful death. So too will our trials
come to an early end, much earlier perhaps than we anticipate.

_POINT II._ Consider Christ’s entrance into Heaven amid the adoring and
exulting choirs of the entire angelic host, and proceeding to occupy the
most magnificent of all thrones, prepared for Him at the right hand of
His Father. Then began a bliss not less real than His sufferings had
been, with a joy ever ancient and ever new, and destined to last for all
eternity. Happy souls, redeemed by His sacred death, and purified in His
precious blood, are flocking in from every clime, and are received to
His loving embrace. What ecstasy! Shall I ever reach that goal? It is
destined for me. Jesus is the King whom I am serving. He knows me, He
loves me, He beckons me on.

_POINT III._ Look around that blissful abode. Who are there? All the
truly good of every generation. There, on that bright throne nearest to
Jesus is His Blessed Mother Mary, the queen of Heaven and earth, the
refuge of sinners, the help of Christians, my loving Mother. Kneeling in
spirit at her feet I will ask for perseverance in her service. There are
my blessed patrons, whom I have honored on earth, now ready to welcome
me to their happy company. Holy Saints of God, pray for me! There are
many blessed souls whom I knew in the days of their own trials on earth,
my parents and relatives and fellow-religious, and some perhaps whom I
have benefited in life, or after their death in Purgatory.

All look down on me with loving eyes, and bid me persevere and improve
further in fervor of life; for “The sufferings of this time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory to come, which shall be revealed in
us” (Rom. viii, 18).

_POINT IV._ Consider the words of the two Angels: “Why stand you looking
up to heaven? This Jesus who is taken up from you into heaven shall so
come as you have seen him going into heaven.” For this second coming of
the Lord we must now prepare by active work. The days of the retreat
will soon be past, we must return to the daily drudgery of life; but we
must do so with a renewed spirit of genuine devotion. We must prepare
like the Prudent Virgins: “At midnight there was a cry made: Behold, the
bridegroom cometh, go ye forth to meet him—And they that were ready went
in with him to the marriage” (St. Matth. xxv, 6-10).

_Colloquy._ Address our dear Lord lovingly, joyfully, congratulating Him
on His triumph, and begging for a generous spirit of sacrifice in His
service.


                             CONSIDERATION
                         On the Spirit of Love


The ultimate purpose of the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius, is to
make us serve God in the most perfect manner possible, and therefore in
the spirit of love, or charity: “Now there remain faith, hope, and
charity; these three, but the greater of these is charity” (I Cor. xiii,
13). Love is the most excellent homage that the creature can render to
the Creator. Behold the bee in the springtime issuing from its hive and
soaring afar over the sunny fields. It is in quest of honey: Honey is
all it cares for. It passes by the velvet pansy, the flaming tulip, and
lights with eagerness on the humble clover, because it finds honey
there. Thus too some men prize and seek nothing but riches, others only
honor, others pleasure, etc.

What can there be in this vast material universe that God would deign to
care for? It is love of the human heart. It is His delight to be with
the children of men, as He tells us in the Book of Proverbs: “My
delights to be with the children of men” (viii, 31). And what does the
Lord desire from men? He states it further on: “My son, give me thy
heart” (Ib. xxiii, 26); that is, of course, thy love; for the heart of
man is the emblem of love. Without love nothing has value in God’s eyes,
as the Apostle proclaims so eloquently in his First Epistle to the
Corinthians: “If I should distribute all my goods to the poor, and I
should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth
me nothing” (xiii, 3). This charity is so pleasing to Heaven because it
comes from Heaven; it is Divine: “The charity of God is poured forth in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us” (Rom. v, 5). Of
course, our love of God is no benefit to Him, no more than the love of a
little child for its parents is any profit to them. The infant causes
any amount of inconvenience and trouble in the home. Its loving looks
and tender caresses are all it can give in return for the kindness shown
it; but this is sufficient in the eyes of affectionate parents. We are
like infants before the Lord, we can give Him nothing that He stands in
need of, all He desires of us is that we love Him; and this very love He
turns to our own advantage, for He rewards it most richly.

Besides this reward, there is another advantage derived from loving God,
namely that love lightens all burdens of life. Why does a young mother,
formerly rapped up in the pursuit of pleasure, now sit so patiently for
hours by the bedside of her ailing child, forgetful of all worldly
amusements,—except because she loves that infant. Love makes all efforts
pleasing; as Thomas à Kempis puts it: _Facile equitat quem gratia Dei
portat_, “He rides along with ease who is borne up by the grace of God.”
So if we are animated by the love of God, we rejoice in serving Him, we
hunger and thirst after justice. And this cheerful service on our part
vastly increases the love God has for our persons; “For God loveth a
cheerful giver” (2 Cor. ix, 7).

And thus by the practice of Divine love the bond that unites the human
soul with our Blessed Lord grows stronger and stronger. Therefore, while
the worldling sees nothing but hardships in the religious state, the
inmates of the cloister would consider it the saddest misfortune if they
were compelled to leave their happy homes and return to the world.

This love of God is that sacred fire of which Christ said: “I am come to
cast fire on the earth, and what will I but that it be kindled?” (St.
Luke xii, 49). It shone with a most refulgent light when, on the day of
Pentecost, the Holy Ghost appeared in the form of fiery tongues and
filled the minds and hearts of the disciples. And see how the Divine
love, then received, transformed the Apostles into new men. Before, they
had been very dull of comprehension, some of them asking the Saviour on
the day of His ascension whether He was then going to restore the
Kingdom of Israel; then they became at once the infallible teachers of
the world. Before, they had been cowardly men, locked up in the upper
room for fear of the Jews; then they were suddenly changed into heroes,
rejoicing, when they had been publicly whipped, that they were allowed
to suffer for the name of Jesus. All of them were glad to die for their
Lord. Countless martyrs were enkindled with the same fire of love; men,
timid women, little boys, tender maidens, astonishing the Pagans by
their heroic fortitude.

When the early persecutions were past, thousands of solitaries retired
from the allurements of the world, and were led by the spirit of Divine
love into frightful solitudes to spend their lives in penance and
prayer, thinking of God alone. Every subsequent age in the history of
the Church is replete with similar exhibitions of the love of Jesus.
Hundreds of thousands of Christians left home and country, and
sacrificed their lives to rescue from the hands of Pagans the tomb of
the Redeemer. Others, during the Ages of Faith, devoted their riches or
their personal labor to erect magnificent cathedrals, and provide a rich
supply of gold and silver vases, of precious vestments and ornaments for
the house of their beloved Lord.

When the charity of many had grown cold, the Blessed Saviour knew how to
rekindle its fires by means of the devotion to His Sacred Heart. He
appeared to His humble servant Blessed Margaret Mary Alacoque, and said
to her: “Behold the heart that has loved men so much, and yet I receive
nothing but ingratitude in return.” The whole purpose of this beautiful
devotion is to elicit the love of human hearts for their loving Saviour,
so as to unite God and men together by the golden bond of love.

To promote this devotion Jesus has been liberal in His promises. For
those who practise it fervently He promised that He would be their
secure refuge during life and above all in death, that He would bestow a
rich blessing on all their undertakings, that by it tepid souls would
become fervent, and fervent souls would mount quickly to a high
perfection, that He would give to priests the gift of touching the
hardest hearts, that He would write in His sacred Heart the names of
those who would zealously promote this devotion and He would never allow
them to be blotted out.

It is conformable to the sweet ways of Providence to make the remedy of
an evil reach further than the disease. Thus, when our race had been
disgraced by the sin of Adam, God far more than repaired the harm done;
which makes holy Church exclaim with gladness: “Oh, happy fault, which
merited to have such a Redeemer!” And so it has been with the devotion
to the Sacred Heart. It was instituted by the Lord that men might learn
to appreciate more highly His love for us, and return Him a more ardent
love than was given Him before, to atone also for the coldness and the
sins of others, and to induce all to receive more frequently His Sacred
body and blood. It is truly wonderful how successfully all this has been
accomplished. Now millions of persons of all ages and conditions in
life, have formed the excellent habit of daily giving their first
thoughts to elicit an act of love for Jesus, and offering all their
actions and sufferings at the opening of each day for the intentions of
the Sacred Heart. And it is probably no exaggeration to say that, since
Christ’s desire of frequent Communions was whispered by Him to Blessed
Margaret Mary, the number of Holy Communions daily received has
increased, not only a hundred but a thousand fold.

And while such devout practices have thus multiplied beyond all
calculation, the main purpose of it all has been attained to a most
consoling extent. For while the age in which we live is becoming more
and more indifferent and often hostile to the Lord, His true friends
long more ardently than before to return to Him love for love, and to
induce countless souls to serve Him in the spirit of love. This spirit
no doubt animates our own hearts. It has now been enkindled anew in the
Spiritual Exercises; and it ought to be the dominant note in the new
life for which this retreat has been a preparation. Let us do our
utmost, with the help of Divine grace, to do all things henceforth in
the spirit of the love of God. This spirit of love is beautifully
expressed in the


                       HYMN OF ST. FRANCIS XAVIER


                   My God, I love Thee! not because
                     I hope for Heaven thereby;
                   Nor because those who love Thee not
                     Must burn eternally.

                   Thou, O my Jesus, Thou didst me
                     Upon the Cross embrace!
                   For me didst bear the nails and spear,
                     And manifold disgrace,

                   And griefs and torments numberless,
                     And sweat of agony,
                   Yea, death itself—and all for one
                     That was Thine enemy.

                   Then why, O Blessed Jesus Christ,
                     Should I not love Thee well?
                   Not for the hope of winning Heaven
                     Nor of escaping Hell;

                   Not with the hope of gaining aught,
                     Not seeking a reward;
                   But as Thyself hast loved me,
                     O everlasting Lord!

                   E’en so I love Thee, and will love,
                     And in Thy praise will sing—
                   Solely because Thou art my God,
                     And my eternal King.

                   Translation of E. CASWALL.


                          THE THIRD MEDITATION
                             On Divine Love


After our consideration on the value and excellence of Divine love and
its connection with the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, we are
now to meditate on some striking manifestations of God’s love for us,
and on various ways in which we can manifest our love for Him.

We begin, with St. Ignatius, by remarking that genuine love does not
consist in a mere feeling, or sentiment, but in the will to please or
benefit the person loved, even at the cost of sacrifice on our part. For
instance, imagine two boys, coming home for vacation from a boarding
school, differing greatly in the manifestation of their affection for
parents and kindred, whom both were glad to meet again. One of them was
very demonstrative of his tender feelings; you would have thought that
his love for all was far greater than that of his less effusive brother.
After a few days however their father had a task for them to do which
required a little sacrifice on their part. Then the affectionate lad had
all manner of excuses to evade the trouble, without giving a thought to
his father’s needs, while his brother quietly volunteered to do the work
of both. His love was genuine; such should be our love for God.

A second remark of St. Ignatius is that love between two persons is
increased by the frequent interchange of kindly services. The more we do
for God, and the more we consider what He has done for us, the more
devoted we shall become to Him, and the more pleasing in His sight.

_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold Jesus before you, looking benignly
down upon you as upon a loved child.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg fervently for an increase of love for Him.

_POINT I._ Recall to mind the principal benefits you have received from
God, from your birth till the present day, both those common to you and
all others, and particularly those peculiar to yourself, tracing the
wonderful ways in which a benign Providence has guided you to your
present state. Render hearty thanks to the Lord, and make Him the
following offering in return: “Accept, O Lord, all my liberty, accept my
memory, my understanding and my will. Thou hast given me all these
powers; I restore them all to Thee, and I deliver them entirely into Thy
hands that Thou mayest direct them. Only give me Thy love and Thy grace;
these are all I desire.”

_POINT II._ See how God is most intimately present to you, not only as
the water of the ocean is about a sponge, before it and behind, above
and below, right and left of it and within every pore, but He penetrates
your entire body and soul, and His delight is to be with the children of
men.

On your part resolve to keep yourself constantly in the presence of God,
cultivating the habit of thinking lovingly about God, speaking with Him
when not otherwise employed. This need not cause a strain of mind; it
only gives an excellent direction to our thoughts and affections, which
would otherwise be wasted upon useless or perhaps even unworthy objects.
Lovingly offer this resolution to your dear Lord, and ask Him to bless
and prosper it.

_POINT III._ Consider how God is unceasingly working for you, as a
loving father works for the support of his children. He causes the earth
to produce whatever you need for food and raiment and lodging; in far
distant climes He makes the fruits and the spices grow which are to
refresh and to cheer you. Resolve, in return, to labor strenuously for
whatever will promote the glory of God. The field of zealous labors for
the honor of God and the good of souls, the children of God, is vast and
varied. Christ bids us pray the Lord of the harvest that he may send
laborers into His harvest (St. Luke x, 2). Offer yourself to be a
devoted laborer, ask for toils and even hardships in this noble service.
See what special efforts you can make in this matter, and offer your
resolves to the Lord.

_POINT IV._ Every trait of goodness, whatever is amiable or admirable in
any creature, is but a faint reflection of an infinite perfection in the
Creator. A bright flower, a vast prospect, a noble deed, an affectionate
heart and a thousand other charms found on earth are able, each of them,
to raise our minds to the thought of the beauty, the grandeur, the
infinite loveliness of our dear Lord. Thus the sight of a pretty flower
sometimes threw St. Ignatius into an ecstasy of Divine love.

Resolve, that, whenever any charm on earth arouses your love or
admiration, you will take occasion from it to raise your heart to God,
and to elicit an act of love for Him who is the source and the pattern
of all that can duly delight the human heart.

_Colloquy._ Finish this last meditation of the retreat with a generous
consecration of yourself and of all you have to the love and service of
your dear Lord and Master, either in your own words or in those of St.
Ignatius quoted in the first point of this exercise, or in the loving
renovation of your religious vows.


THE END OF THE EIGHT DAYS RETREAT.




                              SIX TRIDUUMS
       In Preparation for the Semi-Annual Renovation of the Vows


                               TRIDUUM A


                              MEDITATION I
                      On the Desire of Perfection


_1st Prelude._ Hear Christ, in the Sermon on the Mount, saying to His
disciples: “Be ye perfect as also your heavenly Father is perfect” (St.
Matth. v, 48).

_2nd Prelude._ Beg for an earnest desire of perfection.

_POINT I._ _One great hindrance to attain perfection_ is the want of
desire to attain it, a want of proper appreciation of this exalted
privilege. This state of mind is:

1. _Very unreasonable, unwise._ It is like the deplorable disposition of
many college boys, whom we blame and despise, because they have not
sense enough to value their opportunity to acquire an education. Their
fault is palliated by their youth; they will be sorry afterwards. There
is no such excuse for religious. They ought to know better. Striving
after perfection is the main duty of their state.

2. _Very inexpedient for their happiness even in this world._

“The heart of man is made for God! nothing but God can make it happy,”
says St. Augustine. A lax religious is less happy than a fervent one; he
does not enjoy that peace of mind which the world cannot give; he
worries, frets at many things, unlike the fervent.

3. _Inexpedient for the next life_, causing immense loss of merit and
future glory, exchanged for trifles.

4. _Injurious to our neighbor_, whose salvation depends to a great
extent on our holiness.

_POINT II. A second hindrance to the attainment of perfection_ consists
in a want of confidence of attaining it. Some imagine that perfection,
desirable as it is in itself, is out of the question for them, they are
unworthy of aspiring to it. Now distrust of self is excellent, but we
must not distrust God, either His power or His love for us. God is not
like the man condemned in the Gospel who began to build and could not
carry the building to completion. He has invited us to aim at
perfection; for that is the nature of the religious life. We have
accepted His invitation; it is now for Him to furnish us copious means
to attain perfection. The die is cast; we are pledged to strive after
perfection, and God has pledged Himself to provide. Father Lallemant, so
enlightened in spiritual matters, has left written that the holiness to
which every Jesuit is called surpasses all imagination, and that, if any
one could see the amount of grace that God has prepared for each of us,
he would conclude they were destined for no less a Saint than an
Ignatius or a Xavier (Spiritual Doctrine, page 29).

We ought confidently to say with St. Paul: “I can do all things in him
who strengtheneth me,” _Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat_ (Phil. iv,
13), and with the Psalmist: “If armies in camp should stand together
against me, my heart shall not fear,” “_Si consistant adversum me
castra, non timebit cor meum_” (Ps. 26).

_POINT III. Some religious say they know not how to attain perfection._
The way is plain enough, if only we make up our mind to follow it. It
requires:

1. _The faithful observance of our rules_: whoever observes them
perfectly is a real saint. We all observe most of them; let us observe
all of them.

2. _Much good prayer_, performing our spiritual exercises faithfully and
fervently. In particular let us perform this triduum to the best of our
power.

What is required for this purpose?

a. Silence and recollection;

b. Earnest meditations;

c. Spiritual readings that speak to our hearts;

d. Careful examinations of our spiritual progress.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, asking for a thorough renovation of
Spirit.


                             MEDITATION II
                      In What Perfection Consists


_1st Prelude._ See God enthroned in Heaven, and all the Saints lovingly
looking up to Him.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg grace to understand in what perfection really
consists.

_POINT I._ A thing is good if it answers fairly well the purpose for
which it is made; it is perfect if it answers that purpose as well as is
desirable. Thus a pen is perfect if it is every way suitable to write
with, a watch is perfect if it always keeps time. Now man is made to
love God; he is therefore perfect if he devotes himself entirely to the
love of God. That perfection consists formally in Charity is expressly
stated by St. Paul, who writes to the Colossians: “Above all things have
charity, which is the bond of perfection” (iii, 14).

To attain perfection, therefore, we must accustom ourselves to be
totally taken up with God and God’s interests, for God’s sake. This is
the main purpose aimed at by Father Faber in his excellent book “All for
Jesus.” Read for instance, pages 48, 49. Much of this may be in many men
merely sentimental, or poetical. To make it actual in us, real in our
conduct and the dispositions of our will, seeking God in all things, is
true sanctity. At this we must steadily aim. It is in fact the motto of
our Society: _Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam_, “To the Greater Glory of God.” A
perfect man is a man of one idea, the idea of the greater glory of God.

_POINT II. Such devotedness to God requires detachment from all
creatures_; this detachment is not itself perfection, but it is a
necessary condition to attain this entire devotedness, in which
perfection consists. We must act like the man who had found a treasure
hidden in a field, who to secure it _went and sold all he had_ to buy
that field; and like him who, to buy the precious pearl, _went and sold
all he had_ (St. Matth. xiii, 44-46). We must be detached. Our hearts
are so narrow that we cannot give a part of them to one object without
detracting from our love for another, except only if we love the former
solely for the sake of the latter. Thus we should love all for God.
Therefore we start on the road to perfection by leaving all things to
follow Him. It must not prevent us from taking interest in many things,
else we become wooden saints. With a St. Ignatius, a St. Francis Xavier,
a St. Catherine of Sienna, etc., we must cherish eager desires of many
projects, but only in as much as they promote God’s glory and the
salvation of souls.

_POINT III. In particular the study of perfection requires constant
efforts_: 1. To adorn our soul with more and more virtue, 2. To correct
our faults, 3. For this purpose, to labor earnestly at our particular
examen, our confessions, 4. To direct our spiritual readings and
meditations to the purposes of the illuminative way, returning to the
purgative way if there arises some special need of it. Keep weeding,
planting, binding. The chief point in this triduum is to see whether we
have been of late seriously laboring at the acquisition of perfection as
we now understand it: in particular whether we are attached to any
creature so as to retard our progress, or habituated to commit any
faults, which must be corrected; also how we profit by our Holy
Communions, our meditations, etc., so as to promote steady progress in
virtue.

_Colloquy._ Ask for the special graces of which you see a present need.


                             MEDITATION III
                     Christ the Model of Perfection


_1st Prelude._ See Christ carrying His cross, and saying: “_If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me_” (St. Matth. xvi, 24).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for grace to follow Christ faithfully.

_POINT I._ Consider the consoling truth that _Christ has really made
Himself our guide_. He is such by word and example. We could not have a
nobler nor safer guide. He has led millions before us to the highest
happiness. In this text _He invites us to follow Him_. Let us thank Him
for this gracious offer and eagerly accept it. He is to us what the
Angel Raphael was to Tobias. True, Tobias could see the Angel, but he
did not know who he was; we cannot see Christ, but we know who He is and
how He has acted. Our Society undertakes to follow Him in all the
details of our lives. In this following consists perfection. We are
actually following Him; but how earnestly? how generously? Can we not
improve in many respects?

_POINT II._ Consider the words: “_Let him deny himself._” Christ denied
Himself: His ease, His health and life, His honor. In trying to follow
Him we made a good beginning when we left our parents and all earthly
possessions; to crown the work we must leave ourselves: _1st. Our ease_,
by hard work, without repining, with joy and perseverance. Many seculars
work much harder than we do, but many do so grudgingly. Not so Christ;
we must do like Him.

_2nd, Our health and life_, leaving all this in God’s hands, with proper
care indeed, but no solicitude. Oh, if we could die in His service! It
would be the greatest happiness. We may have that good fortune if we
never shirk any duty. _3, Our honor._ Christ willingly made Himself “A
worm and no man, the reproach of men and the outcast of the people” (Ps.
21). The lowest on earth at first, He is now the highest in Heaven, and
He invites us to follow Him. When we experience loss of ease, of health,
of honor, how do we take it?

_POINT III._ Consider the words: “_and take up his cross_.” What is our
cross? It is not so heavy as Christ’s. Our cross is: _1st, Our daily
tasks_. Perform them faithfully, zealously, cheerfully. _2nd, Our
afflictions, sufferings, failures, disappointments._ Be patient, do not
despond: “Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof” (St. Matth. vi,
34). Trust in God: “No one hath hoped in the Lord and hath been
confounded” (Ecclus. ii, 11).

_3rd, Our passions_; we must keep them in check by unremitting efforts.

_4th, The conduct of others_: “Blessed are ye when they shall revile
you—Be glad and rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven” (St.
Matth. v, 11). “The sufferings of this time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us” (Rom.
viii, 18).

_POINT IV._ Consider the words: “_And follow me_.” Keep your eyes on
Jesus carrying His cross. Notice: 1. His exterior behavior. Do we
properly observe our rules of modesty? 2. His interior sentiments. Like
His Sacred Heart, is our heart at peace? Kind to all? Conformable to
God’s will? “Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am
meek and humble of heart, and you shall find rest to your souls” (St.
Matth. xi, 29).

_Colloquy._ “Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou shall go”
(St. Matth. viii, 19).


                             MEDITATION IV
                The Need of Prayer to Attain Perfection


_1st Prelude._ See the Apostles around Christ, and saying: “Lord teach
us to pray” (St. Luke xi, 1).

_2nd Prelude._ Beg earnestly to become a man of prayer.

_POINT I. No perfection is attainable without much fervent prayer._ For
perfection consists in charity, the love of God, and this love is not
natural to man. Men naturally view everything as related to themselves,
to their earthly advantages of business, ease, pleasure, honor, etc.
Perfection substitutes God for self. This, being altogether
supernatural, requires much grace, and the ordinary means to obtain
grace is prayer.

Those who enter on the way to perfection must be trained to the pursuit
of it. All religious Orders use for this purpose a copious supply of
prayer. Our Society in particular has constant recourse to this means:
the long retreats, the yearly octiduums, the triduums, the daily
meditations, holy masses, holy communions, daily litanies, examinations
of conscience, the Divine Office, the beads, visits to the Blessed
Sacraments, etc. Most of these exercises are to be continued during
life.

By all this prayer we get to realize practically what worldlings know
only in theory: God’s love, mercy, majesty, holiness, justice, eternity,
providence, etc., His incarnation, the Blessed Sacrament, the power and
love of Mary, etc.

_POINT II._ _When are we men of prayer?_ When we have learned to refer
all things explicitly to God. Cardinal Bellarmin points out three
degrees of prayer:

1st, Some speak to God, but hear no answer, like the populace in the
street crying to a distant king.

2nd, Others receive some token that they are attended to, like men
admitted to an audience and allowed to file a petition.

3rd, Others converse with God and He with them; they hear more than they
say, and, like courtiers, can approach their Lord frequently. How is it
with us? Are we accustomed to turn to God readily, confidently,
lovingly? Some have the gift of prayer before they enter the novitiate,
some get it during their early years of religious life and ever increase
it, some partly lose it amid active duties, some get it at their
ordination, some during their third year of probation, while others
never acquire it to any great extent. It can be obtained by earnest
petition and fidelity in the practice of devout prayer.

_POINT III._ _What difference does it make in a man?_ He may be a
religious, but not a good one unless he becomes a man of prayer; nor is
he safe meanwhile. For one cannot lead the life of a fervent and
faithful religious unless he possess considerable command over his
passions, and he cannot maintain this self-mastery without much good
prayer. Yet he may do so without attaining the third degree of prayer.
But when he reaches that, he becomes a different man, a special friend
of God, enlightened, strengthened, not impeccable, yet pretty safe; a
powerful means for the salvation of souls. Such have been all the models
proposed by holy Church for our imitation.

_POINT IV._ _What chance have we Jesuits of becoming men of prayer?_ An
excellent chance. The third degree of prayer is a common gift of God in
our Society. It is the obvious tendency of our frequent retreats. The
Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius aim directly to produce this fruit,
and the Lord has entrusted the direction of them to our Fathers, whose
duty it is to give them to priests and the laity, even to members of the
most contemplative Orders. Many of our ascetic writers exhibit this gift
in a conspicuous degree. Am I a man of prayer? What can I do to improve
in this important matter?

_Colloquy._ Earnest petition for the gift of prayer, and for light and
grace to take the proper measures to procure progress.


                              MEDITATION V
                The Power of Prayer to Obtain Perfection


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you are listening to Christ at the Sermon on the
Mount while He says: “Ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall
find, knock and it shall be opened to you” (St. Matth. vii, 7).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly to obtain great confidence in prayer.

_POINT I._ _Prayer is a spiritual gold mine._ When gold is discovered on
a piece of arid land, the owners have at once at their disposal the
means of becoming very rich. Similarly the soul that begins to
understand the efficacy of prayer can obtain by its means a copious
supply of actual graces, by which Heaven and perfection are easily
secured. For Providence has so disposed that grace is readily obtained
by prayer, and some holy Doctors therefore call it the key to the
treasury of God. The riches of that treasury are inexhaustible. They are
intended for us and put at our disposal. It was by prayer that a St.
Aloysius, a St. Stanislaus and countless others became saints in their
childhood, that St. Ignatius, St. Francis Xavier, etc., etc., were led
from a worldly to a holy life. All of us have the same means at our
disposal.

_POINT II._ _Listen to Christ’s own invitation and promises._

Read St. Matth. vii, 7-11, St. John xvi, 23, 24.

Notice that these promises do not suppose great virtue in him who prays.
For Christ addresses them to sinners, saying: “If you being evil know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father
who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?” (St. Matth.
vii, 11). We are most readily heard when we ask for spiritual favors.
This is clearly stated by the Saviour, for He says: “How much more will
your Father from heaven give _the good Spirit to them_ that ask him?”
(St. Luke xi, 13).

_POINT III._ Why are we not always heard in prayer? Because we do not
fulfil the required conditions. 1. We must ask what is really good for
us. For St. James writes: “You ask and receive not; because you ask
amiss, that you may consume it on your concupiscences” (iv, 3).

2. We must ask with great confidence. We go to draw the waters of grace
from a rich fountain, but the vessel of our confidence may be so small
that we can carry off but little. While the multitudes pressed upon
Jesus on all sides, one afflicted woman was cured because she touched
Him with great confidence; and He said: “Somebody hath touched me, for I
know that virtue is gone out from me.... But He said to her: Daughter,
thy faith hath made thee whole” (St. Luke viii, 46-48).

3. We must ask with proper reverence and attention.

For how could we expect God to mind our petitions if we do not attend to
them ourselves? If we pray thus He may say: “This people honoreth me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me” (St. Matth. xv, 8).

4. We must pray with perseverance, as Christ teaches by the parable of
the importunate man who came to ask for aid during the night, and
obtained it because he persevered in his importunity (St. Luke xi, 5-8).

5. We must pray with resignation to God’s will, as Christ Himself did in
His agony, saying: “My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass
from me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt” (St. Matth. xxvi,
39). We must be full of confidence that no good prayer ever goes up to
Heaven which does not obtain a grace; but God knows best what grace will
benefit us most, and He deals with us as a loving father with his
children.

_Colloquy._ Ask eagerly for great confidence in the power of prayer.


                             MEDITATION VI
                  The Aid of Mary to Attain Perfection


_1st Prelude._ See the Blessed Virgin Mary in Heaven, surrounded by the
Saints of our Society.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for a fervent devotion to her.

_POINT I. Consider what part God has assigned to her, in the salvation
and sanctification of mankind._

The first promise of the Redeemer referred to her as destined to crush
the serpent’s head. The work of the redemption began with her at the
Annunciation. At her voice Elizabeth and her child were filled with the
Holy Ghost. As through Mary Jesus was given to the world, so through her
He is given to His servants individually. As she was with Jesus all
through His life on earth, so Mary is ever ready to aid each one of us
all through our earthly pilgrimage. On Calvary all of us were committed
to her care in the person of St. John. In her company the disciples
received the Holy Ghost. She has been bodily taken up to Heaven to
intercede for us with the Lord, and to beckon us on to follow her. She
is daily co-operating for the sanctification of numberless souls through
her multifarious religious Orders and Congregations, her Rosary and
Scapular Societies and divers other Confraternities, etc., St. Liguori
and various other Doctors say that every grace given to men passes
through her hands and that a true child of Mary is never lost.

_POINT II._ _Consider what the Blessed Virgin Mary has been to our
Society in particular._ She appeared to St. Ignatius at Loyola, set the
seal on his conversion and freed him once for all from temptations of
the flesh; she made him her devoted Knight at Mont-Serrat; she aided him
in composing his Spiritual Exercises at Manresa; she received the first
vows of the little band at Montmartre on the feast of her Assumption.
She figures most conspicuously in the lives of all our Saints; of St.
Stanislaus, St. Aloysius, St. John Berchmans, St. Alphonsus, Blessed
Baldinucci, etc., etc. She has given us the direction of her Sodalities,
and by its means has helped us to promote piety and purity among
countless numbers of her clients. Thank her warmly for all she has done
in our favor, and ask an increase of sanctity for yourself and for all
your religious brethren.

_POINT III._ _Let each one consider what favors he personally owes to
the Blessed Virgin._ Retrace in mind your practices of devotion to her
from your early childhood to the present day. Offer once more all you
have ever done in her honor. Think of the protection she has afforded
you with a mother’s love, her probable influence on your vocation to the
Society, on your novice fervor, on all your religious life up to the
present day. Is there any devotion which you ever practised in her honor
and which you have since discontinued? With what fervor do you daily
honor her? Could you do more to honor or to please her? either by your
own conduct or by your influence over others?

_Colloquy._ Speak to Mary confidently and lovingly, asking for light and
grace to improve further in your zeal for her glory.


                               TRIDUUM B


                              MEDITATION I
                              On the Vows


_1st Prelude._ Imagine the scene of your first vows.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask light and grace to prepare for a fervent renovation.

_POINT I._ What did we do when we first took our vows?

We offered ourselves to God as a holocaust—with parents, home,
possessions, prospects—body and soul—understanding and will,—to belong
to God alone, to devote our entire life to His service and glory. If we
had died then, what would have been our reward? Life everlasting (St.
Matth. xix, 29). That reward is still due us; it cannot be forfeited or
even diminished except by mortal sin. And if thus lost, it is regained
by penance in its entirety. Thank the Lord warmly for such a treasure,
ask grace to be ever faithful, and to profit by this triduum to increase
your fervor.

_POINT II._ _What has been our life ever since?_ The gradual
consummation of the great sacrifice, the accomplishment of our spiritual
martyrdom. Then we entered the prison, the exile; now we are leading the
martyr’s life, dying the martyr’s death. If we do not find it hard, it
is because grace supports us: “_Facile equitat quem gratia Dei portat_”,
“He rides along with ease who is borne up by the grace of God,” says
Thomas à Kempis. Still our life may be at times unsatisfactory; it is a
martyr’s life, above the power of mere human nature, full of merit,
doing honor to God, hated by the enemies of God, salutary to ourselves
and to the neighbor. This life is never at a standstill, but ever moving
onward and upward; therefore it is up-hill work. And because it is a
combat against sensual inclinations, it has its alterations of successes
and reverses; its progress heavenward is not represented by a straight
but by a curved line. When it gets below a certain level, or tends
downwards at all, we must beware.

_Facilis descensus Averni_, “The descent to Hell is easy.” This is the
very reason for the need of such triduums as the present. Thank God, ask
pardon, resolve.

_POINT III._ _Compare your former with your present dispositions_
regarding your general spirit of fervor, your faithful observance of
rules, even the most minute, your obedience, even of will and judgment,
your earnestness in prayer, your self-distrust, your charity to the
neighbor, your unworldliness, your zeal for souls, your patience. Above
all avoid all wilful faults.

_Colloquy._ Ask earnestly for a thorough renovation of spirit, and offer
your resolutions to the Lord.


                             MEDITATION II
                       On Renovation of the Vows


_1st Prelude._ Imagine God says to you: “My son, give me thy heart”
(Prov. xxiii, 26).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask grace to do so most earnestly.

_POINT I._ _Consider the origin of this renovation._

It was begun by St. Ignatius and his first companions while they were
students at Paris, where they met every year in the Church of
Montmartre, on the feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the
anniversary of their first vows, to quit all things and live for God
alone. The practice was afterwards incorporated in the Constitution of
our Society, and has been adopted by numerous religious Congregations.
It has been found so productive of good results that it ought to
encourage all to perform the same most fervently.

_POINT II._ _What are the purposes of this renovation?_

1. It confirms and reasserts the total dedication of ourselves to the
service of God; as Holy Church invites her children, when they have
attained the age of discretion, to renew by their own act the promises
made in their name by their sponsors at Baptism. If any hindrance
interfered with the validity of our first vows, the obstacle being now
removed, the renovation of the vows gives them permanent force.

2. It may often be more meritorious than the first vows had been, since
it is made after the hardships of the religious life have been
experienced and are therefore more fully realized than before. As the
soldier who reenlists in an army shows more devotedness to its cause
than he did by first joining the ranks of the army.

3. Since the vows act as a second Baptism, removing all sin and all
punishment due to sin, and this precious effect is ascribed by St.
Thomas Aquinas to the perfect charity which the vows imply, the same
results may naturally be expected whenever the vows are renewed with the
same good will. And this same good will is most apt to be present at the
semi-annual renovation of the vows.

4. As the religious vows entitle the soul to a rich supply of actual
graces that it may be faithful to their observance, so the earnest
renovation of the same secures a new supply of such Divine aid to
advance steadily in the pursuit of sanctity.

5. Every act of virtue increases the measure of our eternal happiness,
especially acts of heroic virtue; the loving renovation of the vows is
sure to add each time a rich jewel to our heavenly crown. Taking the
religious vows generously has always a touch of the heroic about it.

6. Each renovation of the vows strengthens our resolves, and clamps us
more firmly to God. It often takes many a blow to drive in a nail and
make it stick with firmness, so with our virtuous resolutions.

_POINT III._ _What are we expected to do during this triduum?_

We must aim at a thorough renovation of the religious spirit; and for
this purpose generous souls will devise various means. But to a certain
extent our Society undertakes to direct our efforts by describing
certain definite practices, which must be faithfully used by all. They
are clearly marked out in the Letter of Father Vincent Caraffa: 1.
Avoiding all unnecessary intercourse with the outside world; 2.
Observing a strict silence, even during the times of the ordinary
recreations; 3. Half an hour’s reading daily of a practical spiritual
book. 4. Making two earnest meditations daily, one of them before the
Blessed Sacrament exposed; 5. Examining one’s spiritual progress for
half an hour every day; 6. A general confession of the last six months;
7. A public self-accusation of faults in the refectory; 8. A clear
account of conscience to the superior. If all this is observed and
performed in the right spirit, much profit will result.

_Colloquy._ Offer good resolutions, and ask further light and grace to
correct all faults.


                             MEDITATION III
              What Kind of Men Does Our Vocation Require?


_1st Prelude._ Imagine Christ says to you: “I have given you an example”
(St. John xiii, 15).

_2nd Prelude._ Pray to understand this great truth and to imitate that
glorious model.

_POINT I._ _Consider that the men required by our vocation are to be
like to Christ_: “Whom God foreknew he also predestinated to be made
conformable to the image of his Son” (Rom. viii, 29). A parable will
explain this. A very rich man had an only son, a model of every virtue
and adorned with every human accomplishment. He devoted a large portion
of his fortune to educate a number of other boys that should be fit
companions for that son as like to him as possible. Thus God is treating
all His elect, and in particular the members of the Society of Jesus.
That is the very purpose for which St. Ignatius was inspired to found
our Society and to give us his Constitution. We are destined to be
perfect images of Christ.

_POINT II._ _Consider some special points of resemblance that the Lord
requires of us._ We must be: 1. _Like Christ in our outward behavior_,
so that He may appear reflected or reproduced in each one of us. That is
the purpose of our Rules of Modesty, to which St. Ignatius was taught by
the Holy Ghost to attach more than usual importance. Do we observe them
faithfully? If we do not, it is because we fail to realize fully the
ideal of our founder, which was nothing less than the image of the Son
of God.

2. _Like Christ in our inner sentiments_, in compliance with His own
invitation: There is so much meaning in His words inviting us to this
special manner of imitation: “Learn of me because I am meek and humble
of heart” (St. Matth. xi, 29). These two virtues are so conspicuous in
our Divine model.

_Meekness_ is emblemized by the gentlest of animals, the tender lamb;
and Christ was figured in the Old Testament by the sacrifice of the
lamb, and proclaimed in the New Testament by St. John the Baptist with
the words: “Behold the Lamb of God” (St. John i, 29). This is not the
characteristic virtue of a warrior, such as St. Ignatius had been; but
he had laid aside that garment of his youth and instead had put on
Christ, as St. Paul teaches us to do, saying:

“Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. xiii, 14). We must do the same.
_Humility_ is most conspicuous throughout the life of Christ; it must be
the foundation of all our spiritual life: “He emptied himself, taking
the form of a servant” (Phil. ii, 7).

3. _Like Christ in our practical reason_, taking God’s view of all
things, in opposition to the views of the world. The whole outlook on
life of a good religious is very different from the outlook of the
worldling. Therefore the world hates us: “If you had been of the world,
the world would love its own; but because you are not of the world, but
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you” (St.
John xv, 19). How can we acquire this unworldly spirit, which is the
spirit of Christ? By meditation, spiritual reading, all manner of
prayer, recollection, spiritual conversation, etc. Are we making earnest
efforts on these lines? Do we avoid profane reading as far as our labors
allow? Novels and newspapers are full of the spirit of the world, and so
is unnecessary conversation with most seculars.

4. _Like Christ in our wills_, which should be ever intent on promoting
the glory of God and ever zealous to procure the salvation of souls. Our
zeal should cause us to labor hard, wherever an opportunity can be found
to further the great purpose of our Society, the greater glory of God.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, asking for light and grace to make
ourselves more like unto Himself.


                             MEDITATION IV
                       Christ Is Here to Help Us


_1st Prelude._ Realize the fact that Christ is present on the altar, and
hear Him say: “Behold, I am with you all days” (St. Matth. xxviii, 20).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for a lively faith in Christ’s presence in our midst,
and a firm confidence in His loving assistance.

_POINT I._ _In what sense is Christ present on the altar?_

1st. _Substantially_, personally, body and soul, God and Man. Make a
firm act of faith, adore Him, lovingly thank Him.

2nd. _As our helper_: “Come to me, all ye that labor and are burthened,
and I will refresh you” (St. Matth. xi, 28). He will help us in
attaining the purpose for which He has brought us to the Society, to
perfect our souls and to save others; in particular to bless the work of
this renovation of spirit. In Him we can do all things: “I can do all
things in him who strengtheneth me” (Phil. iv, 13). Ask eagerly for a
thorough renovation. Examine whether your visits are fervent enough.

_POINT II._ _What treasure do we possess in the holy Mass?_

No one but God could have conceived the blessing granted to the faithful
of being present in their successive generations at the mystical
renovation of the sacrifice of the cross. There, before us, day after
day, the same Redeemer of the world who made Himself the victim of
expiation of our sins on Calvary, makes Himself a victim again in the
same sacrifice, and offers Himself to His eternal Father, as truly as He
did then, to obtain for those present in particular the graces they
desire from His liberality. No prayer could be more powerful than the
holy Mass. If only we duly enter into the spirit of it, a spirit of deep
reverence, of eager supplication, of lively confidence, the daily Mass
cannot fail to be for us a copious source of the choicest blessings.
Whenever we find ourselves in some special need of God’s assistance, let
us offer or hear Mass for that purpose. The result will not always be
visible, but it will probably often be so, and it will always be very
real.

How do we profit daily by this wondrous grace? It will be an important
gain towards the renewing of spirit if we improve our manner of
attendance at holy Mass.

_POINT III._ _What do we receive in Holy Communion?_

We receive God Himself, no greater gift is possible. And we receive Him
as our food; that is, coming to do for our soul what food does for the
body, giving it strength and growth, and keeping it from corruption.
Each worthy Communion increases in us sanctifying grace, gives us an
additional supply of actual grace to lead holy lives, and, as the
Council of Trent declares, it frees us from venial sins and preserves us
from falling into mortal sins.

But the amount of grace received in Holy Communion depends in great part
on our own dispositions. We can greatly increase it by making careful
preparation for the reception of our Lord, by fervor at the moment of
reception, reciting firm acts of faith in the Divine presence, humble
acts of adoration, acts of ardent love and of eager desire and petitions
for Divine graces. The time of thanksgiving after Holy Communion
contains some of the most precious moments of the day. How do I profit
by this golden opportunity to enrich my poor soul? Can I improve my ways
in this respect? We read in the Life of St. Alphonsus Rodriguez written
by a lay brother (pp. 81, 82), that on All Saints’ Day, 1612, after he
had received Holy Communion amid the Scholastics and Brothers of the
community, Christ “showed him in a sensible manner His presence in the
hearts of all those who had just received Him, so that he perceived the
Saviour resplendent with glory whole and entire in each religious.” Thus
Christ is really present in each of us during those precious moments.
Can we not give Him a more loving and honorable reception than we often
do?

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, asking eagerly for light and grace, and
laying before Him special resolutions and earnest supplications that we
may improve.


                              MEDITATION V
                      The Holy Ghost Sanctifies Us


_1st Prelude._ Listen to the words of Christ: “I will ask the Father and
he shall give you another Paraclete” (St. John xiv, 16).

_2nd Prelude._ “Come, O Holy Ghost, replenish the hearts of Thy
faithful.”

_POINT I._ It is a great consolation to us to remember that we are not
expected to work out our perfection by our own power.

_The Holy Ghost is to be the principal agent in this work of
sanctification_; for St. Paul wrote: “The charity of God (and this is
sanctity) is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given
to us” (Rom. v, 5). See what He did in the Apostles, in the early
Christians generally, what he has done in all the Saints, in the
faithful throughout the ages, and in particular in religious, whom He
has selected and separated from the world to make them masterpieces of
holiness. Conceive eager desires of His gifts and a firm confidence in
His assistance. Beg earnestly for His light and grace to advance in
virtue.

_POINT II._ _How does the Holy Ghost sanctify us?_ Not in a miraculous
way, in which He sanctified the Apostles, but by a gradual process: 1.
By the Sacraments, Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Penance He has
been working in our souls from our early infancy. Make earnest acts of
thanksgiving, for these Divine graces already received. 2. By our
spiritual exercises, our meditations, attendance at Mass, examinations
of conscience, visits to the Blessed Sacrament, spiritual readings,
vocal prayers of various kinds; during which the Spirit of God
enlightens us, suggests holy resolutions, encourages and strengthens us
to make generous sacrifices.

Thus we have gradually been formed, to some extent, into spiritual men.
If we are not yet more spiritual, it is because we did not sufficiently
comply with the inspirations of the Holy Ghost, but resisted His efforts
to sanctify us further, like those to whom St. Stephen said: “You always
resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so you do also” (Acts vii,
51). 3. The Spirit of God sanctifies us by assisting all our efforts to
advance in virtue, aiding us to believe, to hope, to love God, to
practise charity to the neighbor, humility, prudence, mortification,
etc.

_POINT III._ _All this influence of the Holy Ghost requires our
cooperation._ The best teacher cannot make a scholar of a careless boy.
Cardinal Manning in his Internal Mission of the Holy Ghost has a passage
explaining this point very forcibly. He says: “No grace that God gives
ever fails of its effect, except through our fault. The seed that falls
upon the barren sand can bear no fruit; that which is cast upon the sea
cannot cast a root; that which falls upon a mind which is like the
troubled sea, or upon a heart which is like the barren sand, will bear
no spiritual fruit. Nevertheless the grace of God in itself is always
fruitful; it never fails of its effect unless we mar it. Are you then
corresponding with the exuberant graces which God is always bestowing
upon you?... Learn then to have a delicate conscience, to understand
promptly, and to correspond, if you can, proportionately; not to receive
great graces languidly, and squander one-half of them, and correspond
faintly with the rest. Try with your whole soul and strength to rise up
and to obey, when the grace of God calls you to any higher state or to
any better action” (Pages 32 and 33). Yet, whatever our natural
disposition may be, by the aid of the Holy Ghost we may become diligent
and fervent in the pursuit of every virtue; for, as St. Paul says: “The
Spirit also helpeth our infirmity. For we know not what we should pray
for as we ought; but the Spirit himself asketh for us with unspeakable
groanings” (Rom. viii, 26). Let us carefully consider what we must
improve on this occasion.

_Colloquy_ with the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier, begging for light and
grace to advance rapidly in holiness.


                             MEDITATION VI
                   Effects Produced by the Holy Ghost


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you behold the scene of the descent of the Holy
Ghost on the Apostles, as narrated in Acts ii, 1-4.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for a liberal infusion of the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. We will consider the principal effects produced by the Holy Ghost
in the soul as they are expressed in four verses of the _Veni Creator_.

_POINT I._ _Accende lumen sensibus_, “Enlighten our minds.” See what a
change the Holy Ghost produced in the minds of the Apostles. They had
failed to understand the teaching of the Blessed Saviour. He had said to
them: “Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shall be
accomplished which were written by the prophets concerning the Son of
man. For he shall be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and
scourged and spit upon. And after they have scourged him, they will put
him to death, and the third day he shall rise again.” And St. Luke adds:
“And they understood none of those things, and this word was hid from
them, and they understood not the things that were said” (xviii, 31-34).
And a little while before Christ’s ascension into Heaven the Apostles
asked Him: “Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to
Israel?” (Acts i, 6). They were still so blinded that they only looked
for earthly power. But the Holy Ghost came down upon them, and at once
they understood all the meaning of Christ’s doctrine.

Ever since that day the same Divine Spirit has been teaching the Church,
enlightening the minds of its members, enabling them, not only to give a
mental assent to the doctrines proposed, but habitually to take God’s
view of things. This is done by the faithful generally, even very simple
souls, “Thou hast revealed them to little ones” (St. Luke x, 21). This
should be done by us, religious, especially, and it should characterize
our teaching and the tone of our conversations; while on the other hand,
“The sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of the Spirit of
God; for it is foolishness to him and he cannot understand” (I Cor. ii,
14).

_POINT II._ _Infunde amorem cordibus_, “Infuse Thy love into our
hearts.” The Love of God is sanctity, and it is a gift of the Spirit of
God. “The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost
who is given to us” (Rom. v, 5). It is the most precious of all gifts
and, like every good gift, it is to be obtained by fervent and constant
prayer. For “Every best gift and every perfect gift is from above,
coming down from the Father of lights” (St. James i, 17). We are
especially encouraged to ask this gift from God, by the fact that Christ
Himself assures us that the Lord loves to bestow this treasure on those
who eagerly ask for it; for he says:

“How much more will your Father from heaven give the Good Spirit to them
that ask him?” (St. Luke xi, 13). Pray for it fervently, on this
occasion in particular.

_POINT III._ _Infirma nostri corporis virtute firmans perpeti_,
“Strengthen the weakness of our bodies with lasting power.” Give us the
virtue of fortitude, an abiding willingness to do and to suffer whatever
the service of God may require. This willingness is the test of our love
for Him and the chief means of our sanctification. We exercise this
willingness by patiently toiling along, suffering checks and
contradictions, meeting with disappointments without being disheartened
by them, enduring fatigue, pain, regret, shame, etc. We may meet all
these trials in the sacred ministry, in the classroom, in humble labor,
anywhere; and that not occasionally, but daily, hourly, yet without
fretting or murmuring, but cheerfully, joyously, buoyantly, scarcely
noticing them, but treating them as matters of course in a life of
generous sacrifice. St. Augustine points out three degrees of patience.
In the lowest degree are those who would rather endure their sufferings
than commit sin to escape from them. Those are in the second degree who
accept willingly what God sends, simply because God wills it. We ascend
to the third degree when we desire to suffer that we may more closely
resemble our suffering Lord. This is a special gift of the Holy Ghost,
our third degree of humility.

_Colloquy._ Ask earnestly that the Divine Spirit may increase in you all
these precious effects.


                               TRIDUUM C


                              MEDITATION I
             On the Need of Frequent Renovations of Spirit


_1st Prelude._ St. Paul writes to the Ephesians: “Be renewed in the
spirit of your mind” (iv, 23).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask grace to increase greatly your spirit of fervor.

_POINT I._ It is one of the infirmities of our fallen nature that we are
constantly drawn down to sensual and other selfish gratifications; and,
to rise heavenward in our desires, we need the exertion of ever renewed
efforts. As truly as the clock needs repeated winding up, so the soul
needs frequent remindings of the vital truths which cause our lives to
be supernatural. For this purpose, St. Ignatius has wisely provided
these semi-annual renovations of spirit. If we did not care to renew our
spirit of fervor at the proper time, the Lord might do it for us by
means far more painful than we imagine. Bitter afflictions brought on
individual persons or upon entire bodies of men, even such as are
favorites of God, are often intended by Him to purify them from moral
stains. Thus, some years before the suppression of our Society, Father
Paradiso was instructed by the Lord to inform Father Ricci, then our
Father General, that the calamities which were going to overwhelm us
were intended to renew the spirit of humility, of faith and piety in the
whole Church. (See B. N.’s “The Jesuits and Their History,” Vol. II,
Page 179.)

_POINT II._ Another reason for this semi-annual renovation of the spirit
of fervor is that our life calls for men of uncommon virtue. The whole
history of our Order proves this truth. Every generation of our members
has had numerous heroes, conspicuous for their spirit of self-sacrifice.
Every generation has had much need of solid virtue on the part of all
its members to perform the difficult tasks imposed on them. For the
present we are passing through a crisis in the world’s history, which
calls for the most patient endurance of ills, and the most generous
spirit of sacrifice, that can be expected from brave and faithful men
supported by the grace of God. Such virtue as you shall need during your
lifetime, if you do not want to disgrace the name you bear, can only be
acquired by leading a life of prayer, and by the ever faithful
performance of your duties, no matter what sacrifices they may require.

_POINT III._ The purpose for which we have entered on this career is
well worthy of all the sacrifices it may demand of us. No grander
purpose can be conceived. God Himself never holds out a higher aim than
that which we are vowed to labor for, namely most perfect happiness for
ourselves and for a countless multitude of other souls. In fact, the aim
of our lives is identical with that for which the Son of God came down
from Heaven, and toiled and suffered upon earth, namely the procuring of
the greater glory of God; _Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam_.

We could not have entered upon this grand career if the Lord had not
given us extraordinary graces to do so. He has deigned to make the
sacrifices implied in it comparatively easy and full of consolations;
and if only we keep up our trust in Him, He will make the rest of our
lives flow on in the same even current of loving worship. They will not
be lives of ease and earthly comforts; far from it. They will be
successions of sacrifices, as was the life of Christ. But he rides
smoothly along whom the grace of God carries onward, _facile equitat
quem gratia Dei portat_; and we shall be cheered on at every step by the
prospect of eternal bliss: “They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
Going they went and wept, casting their seeds; but coming they shall
come with joyfulness, carrying their sheaves” (Ps. 125).

_Colloquy._ Ask earnestly for a thorough renovation of the spirit of
generous service, which is to be the fruit of this triduum.


                             MEDITATION II
                Sin the Chief Hindrance to Our Progress


_1st Prelude._ Imagine Christ speaks to you from the tabernacle and
says: “You are my friends if you do the things that I command you” (St.
John xv, 14).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for copious light and grace to observe God’s
commandments perfectly.

_POINT I. Consider how much we ought to hate even the smallest sin._

In our first meditation we considered the grand purpose for which we
live, the attainment of eternal bliss for ourselves and others and the
greater glory of God. Now sin is the greatest obstacle in our way; it
bars our road to Heaven and directly insults our Lord. The condition of
Christ’s friendship is the observance of His commandments: “You are my
friends if you do the things that I command you.” To sin is to break
those commandments. If it does not always turn us against God, it at
least displeases Him. Even a venial sin is a greater evil than any
temporal loss. We should rather die than wilfully commit one.

This disposition is the second degree of humility, on which we resolve
to live in every good retreat. To it Christ lovingly invites us, saying:
“He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me;
and he that loveth me shall be loved by my Father; and I will love him,
and will manifest myself to him.... If any one love me, he will keep my
word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our
abode with him. He that loveth me not keepeth not my word” (St. John
xiv, 21-24).

_POINT II. Consider the principal causes of sins._

1. One general cause is our thoughtlessness; we are unmindful of the
great truths of religion, the supernatural light of which is allowed to
grow dim amid the distractions of a busy or a frivolous life.
Ecclesiasticus warns us, saying: “In all thy works remember thy last
end, and thou shalt never sin” (vii, 40). Now the remedy of this
thoughtlessness is provided for us in our spiritual exercises: our
meditations, examinations of conscience, spiritual readings, etc. The
religious who is accustomed to perform these faithfully and fervently is
not likely to commit many sins, and he will gradually become more and
more virtuous.

2. Another copious source of sins consists of unmortified passions. When
any passion is aroused, it blinds us to the dictates of reason and the
whisperings of grace. You see this in the conduct of an angry man: he
says and does things which he is afterwards ashamed of and sorry for. It
is so with all unrestrained passions. Consider what are your most
frequent faults and what are their causes. What passions need
particularly to be watched and checked. The triduum is just the time for
self-introspection, examinations of conscience, and for the ordering of
our spiritual exercises.

_POINT III. Consider some faults in particular_, against which a
religious should be guarded.

1. Violation of fraternal charity, whether in word or thought; ever
remember the words of Christ: “Amen, I say to you, as long as you did it
to one of these my least brethren, you did it to me” (St. Matth. xxv,
40).

2. Irreverence in prayer: disrespectful posture, wilful or careless
wandering of the mind, want of proper preparation, etc.

3. Sensuality in food and drink, or in the indulgence of superfluous
sleep.

4. Immodesty of touch or look, effeminate softness of manner or
language, imprudent familiarity.

5. Human respect, more anxiety to please men than to please the Lord,
and therefore doing or saying what is unlawful or imprudent, or omitting
to do what conscience dictates to be our duty.

_Colloquy._ Earnestly beg pardon for faults committed and resolve to
avoid the occasions of sin.


                             MEDITATION III
                       Fidelity in Little Things


_1st Prelude._ Behold Christ occupied in simple manual labor.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask the grace of understanding the value in God’s sight
of perfect fidelity in even the least observances.

_POINT I. What is meant by fidelity in little things?_ It means such
fidelity in doing God’s will on all occasions as to neglect no details,
even the least important. What is there in those details that makes them
precious? It is their conformity to the will of God. That is what Christ
valued in them. The greatest things on earth are insignificant trifles
in the sight of God; but the least act of conformity to God’s will has a
Divine worth, and therefore is more precious than any merely natural
performance. Faith teaches us to appreciate this truth; Christ came to
enforce it by the example of His private life. How do I act in this
matter? Am I habitually faithful in observing all my rules, even those
which seem to be of less importance?

_POINT II. Consider the importance of such fidelity._

1. This fidelity is a necessary precaution against the commission of
great faults. For Ecclesiasticus tells us: “He that contemneth small
things shall fall by little and little” (xix, 1). And our Blessed
Saviour teaches: “He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful
also in that which is greater; and he that is unjust in that which is
little is unjust also in that which is greater” (St. Luke xvi, 10). Thus
small faults in the matter of charity, poverty, sensuality, chastity,
etc., gradually lead to grievous sins. No one becomes at once a great
sinner or a great saint.

_Nemo repente fit summus_, says the old proverb. Before Judas sold our
Lord for thirty pieces of silver, he had accustomed himself to lesser
acts of injustice, as St. John tells us, saying of him that “he was a
thief, and having the purse, carried the things that were put therein”
(xii, 6).

2. Our lives are mostly made up of minor acts, as were the private lives
of Jesus, Mary and Joseph, and countless Saints. A Martyr’s crown in
Heaven may consist of one brilliant gem, the ruby of his heroic death;
but the crowns of most Saints are made up of countless sparkling little
diamonds, each the reward of fidelity in a little thing. Thus too in
human things, in which perfection depends on minor details. For
instance, the politeness of the man who is to the manner born is not
displayed in extraordinary actions, but in that delicate tact which
makes him know his place, so that he never acts amiss, and always says
the right word and does the right thing at the right time. This fidelity
is, in spiritual things, what good taste is in literature and the other
fine arts. Masterpieces differ from common works in the perfection of
the least details; for instance, in sculpture, painting, etc., etc.

_POINT III._ It is by fidelity in minor matters that we acquire the
solid virtues needed to perform heroic deeds when the occasion calls for
them. This is brought about in two ways.

_1. Naturally._ Our conduct on all occasions, even the most important,
depends to a great extent on the good or evil habits we have acquired.
Now habits are acquired by the frequent repetition of acts. It is only
in little things that actions can be frequently repeated; for few of us
have numerous opportunities to do great things. Therefore our habits,
good or bad, are ordinarily the result of our fidelity or infidelity in
little things.

_2. Supernaturally._ Acts of virtue practised by us obtain for us
additional actual graces to practise yet more acts of virtue: and thus
faithful souls constantly strengthen the chain of graces which binds
them ever more closely to God. Unfaithful souls forfeit these additional
helps of grace that were in store for them; and thus their chain of
graces is gradually weakened, so that temptations may occur which cause
them serious falls into sin. Examine your daily conduct of fidelity to
grace.

_Colloquy_, according to the sentiments evoked by these considerations.


                             MEDITATION IV
                      The Observance of Our Rules


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see St. Ignatius, as he is often painted,
with the book of his Constitutions in his hands.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg through his intercession for a high appreciation of
our rules.

_POINT I. What are the rules of our Society?_ They are a summary of
those wonderful Constitutions which the Holy Ghost has used for the
conversion and sanctification of countless multitudes of souls during
the last four centuries, namely:

1. Of the numerous members of our Society during the successive
generations, so many of whom have given evident proofs of having
attained heroic sanctity.

2. Of vast numbers of other persons of the clergy and the laity who have
been saved and sanctified by the virtues and the labors of the members
of our Society.

_POINT II. Why are these rules so productive of sanctity?_

1. Because they are not merely human work; for St. Ignatius, in writing
his Constitutions, obtained by fervent prayer the special assistance of
the Holy Ghost. This is evident from the history of the Saint. (For
instance, Genelli’s “Life of St. Ignatius,” p. 248).

2. Because they lead the way to the perfect imitation of Christ. By his
Spiritual Exercises St. Ignatius makes us conceive the most lofty
ambition that can be aroused within the human heart, namely to make
itself comformable to the heart of Jesus; and by his rules he guides us
through all the details of our earthly career to the realization of this
lofty purpose.

_POINT III. How do our rules accomplish this end?_ By animating all our
actions with the spirit of the three highest virtues: of Faith, Hope and
Charity.

1. They aid us to lead _a life of faith_. For whenever we observe a
rule, we thereby elicit an act of faith, accepting the letter of the
rule or the word of our superior as the expression of the Divine will.
Our life is thus made to consist of a succession of supernatural acts.

2. They make us live _a life of hope_. He that follows his own judgment
leans on a fragile reed; but he that acts because the rules prescribe a
certain course thereby trusts God more than his own reasoning and thus
hopes in the help of God. He shall not be disappointed.

3. They perfect in us _the love of God_. For they constantly prescribe
what tends to the greater glory of God: _Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam_.

Do I observe all my rules faithfully? Does any of them cause me a
special difficulty? Perhaps I do not understand it well; all of them, if
rightly understood, are most reasonable.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, asking for great fidelity to observe all
our rules.


                              MEDITATION V
                             Zeal for Souls


_1st Prelude._ Hear Christ saying: “I am come to cast fire on the earth;
and what will I but that it be kindled?” (St. Luke xii, 49).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly that this fire be enkindled in your heart
and that you may help to spread it far and wide.

_POINT I. That fire is Divine Charity._ It is poured forth into the
hearts of men by the Holy Spirit who is given to us (Rom. v, 5). It
makes us lead a supernatural life, the life of children of God, and in
this sense a Divine life. As the vegetable life transforms the clod of
earth into the fairest flower and the most luscious fruit; as animal
life turns the food into the wonderful organism of the human body; so
the life of grace gives to our acts a heavenly value. By it sinners
become saints, true children of God. Christ shows intense earnestness in
spreading this fire, which is really His greatest work: the most Divine
of all Divine works is the salvation of souls. The Angels are
ministering spirits to aid in this task. All human efforts are
children’s play in comparison with this. To save a soul is a grander
achievement than to conquer an empire.

_POINT II. This sublime work is done chiefly through the agency of men._
Its great promoter was the God-man Himself, the Son of God incarnate.
But He has deigned to associate to Himself the Apostles and their
successors, the bishops and priests of His Church, till the end of time;
to whom He has said: “Going therefore teach ye all nations ... and
behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world”
(St. Matth. xxviii, 19, 20). With these the Lord has associated in a
special manner, through the mission of His Church, various apostolic
Orders of religious, our own Society in particular: “I have chosen you
and have appointed you that you should go and should bring forth fruit,
and that your fruit should remain” (St. John xv, 16).

When Christ first addressed these words to a few poor fishermen, how
unlikely it was that the promise should be fulfilled? Yet it has been
most wonderfully verified. So it will be in our case also if we trust in
God. Yet two thirds of mankind are still pagans. Zeal is needed.

_POINT III. What must we do to spread the love of God?_ We need not do
any novel thing; we must follow the beaten path, travel along the
highroad of our religious life. _Age quod agis_; perform your daily
duties; but do everything well, to the best of your power.

In particular realize in your conduct that,

1. _You are to be the light of the world._ For this purpose you must
form your intellect upon the teachings of Christ. Master His views of
time and eternity, by earnest meditations, sound readings, recollection,
much prayer. Do not contract false views of life by following false
guides, reading worldly authors extensively, imbibing their spirit. The
light that is in you, your intimate convictions, will necessarily shine
around you, through your language, through your conduct. If you are
thoroughly religious, real Jesuits, it will be the light of Christ, and
will truly enlighten the portion of the world where Providence will
place you. If your views are false, you will not do God’s work.

2. _You are the salt of the earth_; incorrupt yourselves, you must keep
others from corruption. This requires pure and holy affections of the
heart, soundness of the will. If we Jesuits, with our training do not
live innocent and holy lives, what remedy can we find? “If the salt lose
its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing any more
but to be cast out, and to be trodden on by men” (St. Matth. v, 13).
These words were spoken by Christ in the Sermon on the Mount, when He
was laying down the platform of His campaign for the conquest of the
world to the Kingdom of His Father. We are soldiers in that campaign.
How worthy is our conduct of such a cause and such a King.

_Colloquy_ with our Divine Lord, promising fidelity and zealous
exertions in this lofty vocation.


                             MEDITATION VI
                     Devotion to the Blessed Virgin


_1st Prelude._ See the Blessed Virgin exalted in Heaven, surrounded by
the Saints and the Blessed of our Society.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg for an increase of devotion to her, invoking her
under the title of Queen of the Society of Jesus.

_POINT I. Why is all the Church so devoted to Mary?_ Because God wishes
to be honored by man especially in connection with the grandest
exhibition of His love for man, the mystery of the Incarnation. Now in
this mystery Mary holds a most prominent place; she is the key to the
proper understanding of it. Besides, as Jesus was given to mankind
through Mary, so through her He is given to individual souls. Therefore
the Church salutes her as “Mother of Divine Grace”; and many holy
writers say that every grace comes to all individual souls through her
intercession.

_How do we know that God is pleased with so great a devotion to Mary?_

1. From the constant teaching of the Church, which has applied to her
such texts as these: “He that shall find me shall find life and shall
have salvation from the Lord” (Prov. viii, 35); “They that work by me
shall not sin” (Ecclus. xxiv, 30); etc.

2. From the Doctors of the Church, who have exhausted all their
resources of learning to inculcate this devotion. Such are Sts.
Augustine, Bernard, Liguori, Anthoninus, Bonaventure, etc.

3. From the workings of the Holy Ghost, who has fostered this devotion
in the lives of numberless Saints and of other highly favored servants
of God, as well as in the practice and prayers of the Church itself, and
the unanimous teachings of her theologians.

4. From so many miracles performed through the invocation of the Blessed
Virgin in every land.

_POINT II. What part has our Society taken in fostering this devotion?_

1. A most conspicuous part. For instance St. Ignatius ascribes his
conversion to the vision he had of her, he made himself her Knight at
Montserrat, he makes us meditate on her and pray to her in our retreats.

2. In the life and death of St. Stanislaus, St. Berchmans, St.
Alphonsus, St. Francis Hieronymo and, in fact, all her Saints and her
great men generally.

3. In her zeal to propagate devotions to Mary by means of her
Sodalities, her devotions of the month of Mary, and countless writings
of her ablest men. No one is considered as a worthy member of our Order
who has not a marked devotion to Mary. How do I strive to honor her? Is
there any practice that I used to perform in her honor that I have
gradually abandoned? What improvement can I make in this respect?

_POINT III. In what does devotion to Mary chiefly consist?_ It is an
acquired habit, the result of countless acts of ours in compliance with
the grace of God. Such are:

1. The devout celebration of her festivals, preparing for them by
novenas and continuing them by the celebration of their octaves;

2. The daily recitation of the Rosary, or at least of the third part of
it, the Beads, of the Litany of the Blessed Virgin and the Office of her
Immaculate Conception;

3. The wearing of her scapular of Mount Carmel, and of medals blessed in
her honor;

4. The recitation of set prayers to her at rising in the morning and
retiring at night, at the sound of the Angelus bell, morning, noon and
night;

5. Fervent invocations during the day, especially at the approach of
temptations;

6. Reading and meditation on her prerogatives;

7. Conversing on the same, or in any way promoting her devotion. We can
render no greater service to any one than to make him devout to the
Blessed Virgin Mary. Are we doing as much as we can in this respect?

_Colloquy_ with Mary, asking her guidance to learn to love her more and
to lead many others to love her.




                               TRIDUUM D


                              MEDITATION I
                      The Purpose of This Triduum


_1st Prelude._ Vividly picture to yourself St. John Berchmans at his
prayer.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg for copious grace to imitate his spirit of fervor.

_POINT I._ Consider that in the sight of God _men differ from one
another only according to their interior dispositions_: _Omnis gloria
filiae regis ab intus_, “All the glory of the King’s daughter is within”
(Ps. 44). It matters nothing whether a person be rich or poor, learned
or ignorant, man or woman, old or young, refined or uncultured, etc. We
are apt to forget this and to trust in some natural superiority, as the
world does. The Lord said to His prophet Samuel: “I do not judge
according to the look of man; for man seeth those things that appear,
but the Lord beholdeth the heart” (I Kings xvi, 7). The right view of
ourselves will be one of the great disillusionments at death. Let us now
strive to view ourselves as we are in God’s sight.

_POINT II. Consider this truth in special examples_, comparing a St.
Alphonsus Rodriguez with an ordinary Jesuit, a Brother, a Father or a
Scholastic. How similar outside. How different within. Compare a St.
John Berchmans, a St. John Francis Regis with a Passaglia, a Tyrrell,
etc., a mere boy, like St. Stanislaus, with a veteran religious of the
ordinary cast. This interior proper disposition of which the Psalmist
sings is apt to promote devotion, which St. Francis De Sales describes
as follows: “Devotion is nothing else but that spiritual agility and
vivacity by which charity works in us, or we by her, with alacrity and
affection; and as it is the business of charity to make us observe all
God’s commandments generally and without exception, so it is the part of
devotion to make us observe them cheerfully and with diligence....
Devotion is the pleasure of pleasures, the queen of virtues, and the
perfection of charity. If charity be milk, devotion is the cream; if
charity be plant, devotion is the flower; if charity be a precious
stone, devotion is its lustre; if charity be a rich balm, devotion is
its fragrance, yea the odor of sweetness which comforts men and rejoices
Angels” (“Devout Life,” chapter 1, 2). Do I cultivate this disposition
in my heart with proper earnestness?

_POINT III. Consider that the purpose of the triduum is to renew this
devotion within our hearts_, its purity and its energy. Consider that
God Himself affords this opportunity, and invites you to profit by it.
His grace is ready to help you. What must you do during these three
days? Our Society lays the observances before you which you are expected
to follow. In her name Father Vincent Caraffa says to you: “Let each
one, leaving alone all literary studies (except the work prescribed)
apply himself exclusively to the improvement of the spirit. Certain
practices in particular are pointed out, namely perfect silence as far
as possible, half an hour daily of truly devout reading, half an hour
likewise of earnest examination of conscience, special meditations on
the renewal of the spirit of piety, a manifestation of conscience, a
confession of the faults committed since the last renovation and a
public accusation of defects.”

Remember in all this the saying of St. Ignatius: “The more generous we
shall show ourselves towards God, the more generous we shall find God
towards us, and the more fit we shall daily be to receive in greater
abundance His graces and spiritual gifts.”

_Colloquy._ Ask eagerly and confidently for the grace of making a
fervent triduum.


                             MEDITATION II
                          The Interior Spirit


_1st Prelude._ Imagine Christ speaks to you from the tabernacle,
offering to be your teacher in the spiritual life.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg of our dear Lord to teach you in what consists the
interior spirit which is to be renewed during the triduum.

_POINT I. In what consists that interior spirit?_ It is described in
Holy Writ under the name of “Wisdom,” and the entire book called
“Wisdom” is occupied in praising and explaining it. For instance, its
seventh chapter says: “I called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came
upon me, and I preferred her before kingdoms and thrones, and esteemed
riches nothing in comparison of her.... Now all good things came to me
together with her.... She is an infinite treasure to men, which they
that use become the friends of God, being commended for the gift of
discipline” (vii, 7-14).

Wisdom is the virtue by which we direct our acts by the best means to
the best end, which is the end for which we were created, the glory of
God. This is the spirit of our Society, “All for the Greater Glory of
God.” And this is the spirit which we must renew within us by the
exercises of the triduum. It regards the purpose or intention for which
we act, and therefore it is called “the interior spirit.”

_POINT II. What is opposed to the interior spirit?_ Two classes of
faults are opposed to this interior spirit,

1. Those by which we seek sinful gratifications,

2. Those which simply fail to direct our actions to our supernatural
end. Supposing that we are careful to avoid all wilful sin, let us
consider how we can be wanting in the interior spirit. There are various
ways: (a) We may be actuated in many of our actions by the love of
praise, not seeking to please God but to please ourselves. Of course all
that is done for a merely natural purpose is so much labor lost for
eternity: “Take heed that you do not your justice before men, to be seen
by them; otherwise you shall not have a reward of your Father who is in
heaven (St. Matth. vi, 1). Thus a religious, whether a Father, a
Scholastic or a Brother, may give great satisfaction to his superiors,
to his brethren and to outsiders, and yet have little merit before God.”

The country is full of able and energetic teachers, for instance, who
work only for earthly rewards.

(b) We may lead a life of mere impulsive energy, getting interested in
our work, perhaps to the neglect of higher duties, or we may be drawn by
mere natural affections: “If you love them that love you, what reward
shall you have? Do not even the publicans this?” (ib. v, 46).

(c) In many of our actions we may be doing mere routine work. If we
began the task with a good intention, though we continue it without
further thought of the same, this is not mere routine, but may be very
meritorious. The danger is that we may waste much time and energy by
merely mechanical action without any supernatural intention. Do I strive
earnestly to live for God, A.M.D.G.?

_POINT III. What means can I use for this purpose?_

1. Good daily meditations, by which I keep supernatural motives before
my mind.

2. Careful examinations of conscience, watching in particular the
motives of my actions.

3. Earnest prayer for light and grace steadily to advance in sanctity.

Such prayer is suggested in various parts of the “Book of Wisdom,” to
which we referred before; for instance, “Give me wisdom, that sitteth by
thy throne, and cast me not off from among thy children. For I am thy
servant and the son of thy handmaid, a weak man and of short time, and
falling short of the understanding of judgment and laws. For if one be
perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he
shall be nothing regarded” (ix, 4-6).

_Colloquy._ An earnest petition for grace to renew and increase our
interior spirit.


                             MEDITATION III
                The Interior Spirit Is Fostered by Faith


_1st Prelude._ Recall the words of Christ: “Amen, amen, I say unto you,
He that believeth in me hath everlasting life” (St. John vi, 47).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly for an intense spirit of faith.

_POINT I. Consider the value of faith in the sight of God._

1. It is one of the theological virtues, which are infused into our
hearts by the Holy Ghost: and thus, coming from God they have a Divine
efficacy. Therefore whatever action is prompted by faith has
supernatural merit, that is deserves an eternal reward. Hence the
teaching of Christ: “He that believeth in me hath everlasting life.”

2. This value of faith is praised most highly by St. Paul, who devotes
to its praise the whole eleventh chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews,
showing how all the Saints of the Old Law were sanctified by their
belief in the promised Redeemer.

3. On the part of man, faith is the sacrifice of his highest faculty,
his understanding, to his sovereign Lord. By it we resign our own
judgment to accept in its place the word of God.

4. It is also the exercise of the virtue of humility, by which we
acknowledge the weakness of our intellect. Now we know that “God
resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble” (St. James iv, 6).

_POINT II. See how faith sanctifies our daily life_:

1. It keeps before us the Divine presence wherever we be; as a sponge
plunged into the sea has water all around it and within the pores of its
substance, so we are in God; “For in him we live and move and be” (Acts
xvii, 28). Aie, God is still more intimately present to us than the
water is to the sponge, for He penetrates every particle of our
substance.

2. Faith reveals to us the real presence of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist, with body and soul, humanity and Divinity, teaching us to
adore Him, to offer Him as our sacrifice and receive Him as our food.

3. Faith makes us recognize the voice of God in the words of our rules
and the directions of our superiors, and thus it makes the details of
our religious life full of merit.

4. Faith pierces the guise of misery and frailty, and makes us recognize
in every human being the hidden presence of Him who will say at the
judgment: “Amen I say to you, as long as you did it to one of these my
least brethren, you did it to me” (St. Matth. xxv, 40).

Thus faith makes the religious life most meritorious.

_POINT III. Examine yourselves on the practical working of the spirit_
of faith in your daily life. Consider:

1. Whether you strive earnestly to practise the presence of God, by
frequently remembering Him and honoring Him by some ejaculatory prayer;
for instance, at the striking of the clock, or at the signal to begin or
end an exercise. If in your own room, offer each new task kneeling to
your loving Lord and His Holy Mother.

2. Do you visit the Blessed Sacrament frequently and lovingly, attend
Mass devoutly, and receive Holy Communion daily, with proper preparation
and thanksgiving?

3. Are you diligent in keeping your rules and docile to the directions
of your superiors? Or do you criticise their orders, thereby showing
that you fail to recognize in them the voice of God?

4. Do you treat all your brethren with generous charity, seeing in them
so many images of Christ? Or do you take a merely human view of them,
being very fond of some and cold towards others, as worldlings treat one
another? Do you endeavor to benefit and console all those in need or in
sorrow?

The days of the renovation of spirit offer a golden opportunity to
examine the motives of all our actions, valuing them all according to
the teachings of faith.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, begging for much light and grace to lead
a life of lively faith, and thus to be thoroughly renewed in spirit.


                             MEDITATION IV
                The Interior Spirit Is Fostered by Hope


_1st Prelude._ Recall the words of the Psalmist: “Trust in the Lord, and
do good.... Delight in the Lord, and He will give thee the requests of
thy heart” (Ps. 36).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for a lively confidence in the help of God to lead a
holy and successful life.

_POINT I. The virtue of hope inspires lofty aspirations._ All men must
hope for such graces from God as will enable them to attain the ends to
which they are called. But as religious, and as Jesuits we are certainly
called to attain perfection for ourselves and abundant fruit in the
souls of others. Unless a Jesuit aims at these two objects, he falls
below the mark of his vocation; He is a spiritual abortion. All other
aims are trivial in comparison. That we are called to this twofold
success is declared by the second rule of the Summary; and therefore the
words of Christ are meant for us: “I have chosen you and have appointed
you that you should go and should bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain” (St. John xv, 16). This lofty aim is the spirit of our
vocation. It is fostered by the virtue of hope.

_POINT II. The virtue of hope gives us confidence of success._ The
sanctification of our own soul and of many others is certainly above the
power of any man. If therefore we had not the help of God for this
purpose, we could not attain this effect. But with the help of God we
can do wonders: “I can do all things in him who strengthened me” (Phil.
iv, 13). Two sentiments must combine in me for the purpose: an intimate
conviction of my total inability to save souls, and a firm confidence in
the power and goodness of God to effect this result through my weakness:
“The foolish things of the world hath God chosen, that He may confound
the strong; and the base things of the world and the things that are
contemptible hath God chosen, and things that are not, that he might
bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should glory in his
sight” (I Cor. i, 27-29). The more humble our opinion of ourselves and
the more lively our confidence in God, the more earnest no doubt will be
our efforts to sanctify ourselves and others, and thus the more we shall
foster in us the spirit of our vocation.

_POINT III. To attain supernatural results we must trust in the use of
supernatural means._ All the Philosophy of the world cannot convert a
Pagan; nor all theology a Protestant, nor all literature a sinner.
Conversion and sanctification are the work of grace. Now grace is
obtained by prayer, by sacrifice, self-immolation, mortification. This
lesson our dear Lord teaches us with much emphasis, saying: “Amen, amen
I say to you, unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground die,
itself remaineth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit”
(St. John xii, 24, 25). The minister of God is like a grain of wheat; as
the wheat must be cast into the moist and hot furrow and corrupt before
it can produce a new and fertile plant, so God’s minister must not spare
himself, but be mortified and suffer debasement before he can produce
abundant fruit in souls. Still remember that study and work, when done
for supernatural motives, become thereby supernatural means, and are
then as good as prayer, and often better than prayer. For whoever would
neglect his appointed tasks to give extra time to prayer would not
please the Lord. Hard work in the service of God is our habitual duty;
through it we must sanctify ourselves and others. One of the sayings
attributed to St. Ignatius is: “Work as if all your successes were going
to depend on your own efforts; and trust in God as if all depended on
Him, nothing on yourself.” And of course where all depends on the
infinite power and goodness of God, we may expect abundant fruit.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, begging for a lively hope in His
assistance.


                              MEDITATION V
               The Interior Spirit Is Fostered by Charity


_1st Prelude._ See the glorified members of our Society around Jesus in
Heaven, looking down on us with tender affection.

_2nd Prelude._ Beg for a liberal share of the spirit of love.

_POINT I._ Consider that _perfection consists in the love of God_;
therefore whatever increases the love of God within us increases our
perfection, fosters our interior spirit. To increase this love of God,
let us study its excellence: it makes us really friends of Christ, who
said to His Apostles, and says to all who strive to imitate their
example: “I will not now call you servants, for the servant knoweth not
what his Lord doth. But I have called you friends, because all things
whatsoever I have heard of my Father I have made known to you” (St. John
xv, 15). Has not Christ given to the true Jesuit an intimate knowledge
of Himself? Does He not treat us all as His true friends, rather than
servants? The servant is simply expected to obey orders without knowing
the why and the wherefore, without understanding what it is all about.
To us Christ has given, through the Exercises of St. Ignatius, a clear
insight into the entire plan of sanctification, which even our Brothers
and our novices soon get to understand remarkably well. Should we not
then highly appreciate this Divine light and faithfully walk in its
radiance?

_POINT II. This friendship with God has various degrees of perfection_:

1. The lowest degree of friendship is that which at least avoids all
that would so offend a friend as to sever the friendship entirely, and
rather turn it into hatred. In case of our friendship with God, this
severance is produced by any mortal sin. Of course a true Jesuit commits
no mortal sins. Any one who would commit such sins frequently has fallen
below the normal standard of religious life.

2. The second degree of friendship excludes all that offends a friend
deliberately, with full knowledge and consent, though in a matter of
minor importance. This is done by fully deliberate venial sin. This
degree of friendship with God should be the normal condition of every
good religious.

3. The third degree of friendship strives to avoid all that may
displease a friend in any matter whatever, even when there is no
question of giving offense. Such is the condition of fervent religious,
who observe all their rules with great exactness, even those that do not
bind under sin. They do so generously through the spirit of love for
their Lord.

4. A fourth degree of friendship exists in those persons who are ever
eager to give pleasures to their friends, never sparing any trouble to
do so. Examine what is your habitual, or at least predominant
disposition towards our good Lord. Do you often offend Him with full
knowledge and will? Can you be more generous in doing what will please
Him? What improvements can you make?

_POINT III. Consider how friendship is increased._

1. By thinking frequently of the good qualities of our friend, of the
favors he has done us, of the warmth of his affection for us and the
proofs he has given us of it. Therefore we meditate on the Person, the
life and the sufferings of Christ, His Blessed Mother and the Saints.
Can I make my meditations more fervent and more loving? For the same
purpose we should read spiritual books and make ourselves familiar with
devotional literature, carry on spiritual conversations when it can be
done with profit, and collect notes of edifying matters for future use.

2. By emptying our hearts of all human attachments that God may fill
them entirely. The Lord is a jealous lover. Perfect detachment from
creatures is the condition of perfect love of God.

3. By making frequent acts of perfect resignation to the Divine will.
For friendship between two persons consists mainly in union of wills.

_Colloquy._ Ask earnestly for an increase of love of God, and resolve to
avoid all that may hinder it.


                             MEDITATION VI
           The Interior Spirit Is Fostered by the Holy Ghost


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you hear Christ say: “You shall receive the power
of the Holy Ghost coming upon you” (Acts i, 5).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask earnestly that the Holy Ghost may effect in you a
thorough renovation of spirit.

_POINT I. Consider what the Holy Ghost did for the Apostles._ Though
they had been taught by Christ for three years, they had still
understood His doctrine very imperfectly; their affections were still
earthly, set on worldly greatness; their dispositions were cowardly.
What did they need? A copious infusion of light and strength. We are in
a similar situation. They obtained this grace by earnest prayer: “All
these were persevering with one mind in prayer” (ib. 14). In due time
the effect followed: “And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost” (ib.
ii, 4). From that moment they understood all the doctrine correctly;
and, after being scourged before the council, “They indeed went from the
presence of the council, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to
suffer reproach for the name of Jesus” (ib. v, 41). This was only the
beginning of their heroic lives.

_POINT II. Consider what the Holy Ghost does in the Church to-day._ The
work of sanctification of the faithful, begun by the descent of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, was to be continued till the end of time, and
is so continued in us. Just as He has given us sanctifying grace in
Baptism, and has constantly increased the same in a multitude of various
ways up to the present day, so He is determined to continue this Divine
work in our hearts, and to lead us to the practice of all the virtues
proper to our state of life.

In particular He wishes to bestow on us the Seven Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. The very name of “Gift” shows that we are not expected to acquire
those excellent qualities by our own exertions. They may be compared to
the sails attached to a boat, or to the steam or electricity propelling
a machine. It is thus the Holy Ghost makes the practice of virtue easy
for those who implore His assistance. Have we not all experienced this
in many ways? In particular in embracing the religious state? What God
has begun in us He will not desist from, provided in the future as in
the past we co-operate with His graces.

_POINT III. What co-operation does the Holy Ghost expect from us?_ We
have seen that the sanctification of the soul comes chiefly from the
Holy Ghost. Yet He ordinarily requires our co-operation. In what does
this consist?

1. In complying with the inspirations of His grace. This supposes that
we carefully avoid all wilful sins. By mortal sins we would drive Him
entirely from our souls; by deliberate venial sins we oppose His work,
turning to creatures and attaching ourselves to them, thus opposing His
efforts to unite our will with God’s, in which union sanctity consists.
By indeliberate venial sins also we resist His influence, but to a less
degree. Yet we must also strive to diminish their frequency. Then acting
on the promptings of grace, we shall perform a multitude of virtuous
acts, by which the Holy Spirit will advance us to ever higher sanctity.

2. Our co-operation consists in the second place in the fervor of our
prayers, that is in all manner of direct intercourse with God by any of
our spiritual exercises, or by aspirations after God or His gifts,
uttered in the midst of distracting occupations. For these direct
dealings with God are the ordinary means which He provides for the
supply of light and strength to the soul, enabling it to lead a fervent
and faithful life. Our prayers become all the more efficient in this
regard when they are combined with the sacramental graces derived from
confession, Holy Communion, the Holy Mass or visits to the Blessed
Sacrament.

Am I thus faithfully and fervently co-operating with the influence of
the Holy Ghost? What can be improved?

_Colloquy_ with the Holy Ghost, asking what efforts He desires on our
part, and grace to make those efforts.


                               TRIDUUM E


                              MEDITATION I
                      Preparation for the Triduum


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see the graveyard of the Novitiate.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask grace to view all things as those buried there view
them at present.

_POINT I. Consider the vast amount of good done by those buried there_,
the fruit produced in countless souls by their labors in missions,
churches, colleges, parochial schools, retreats given, sermons
delivered, confessions heard, the last sacraments administered, the sick
visited, youths prepared for the priesthood and the religious life,
etc., etc. All these results are still spreading farther and wider, like
the ripples on a pond and last from generation to generation. And by
their faithful observance of rules, the labors borne, the sufferings
endured, the penance practiced, their acts of charity, humility, piety,
etc., they have also accumulated immense rewards for themselves.

_POINT II. Consider the heavenly reward now enjoyed_ by their souls in
company with the Saints and the Blessed, with Jesus, Mary and Joseph.
How light appear to them now their former sacrifices. How fully they now
realize the meaning of these words of St. Paul: “The sufferings of this
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come, that shall be
revealed in us” (Rom. viii, 18). Think also of the multitudes of souls
who are now in bliss with them, and who owe their salvation to the
labors and prayers of those of our brethren whose remains lie in this
sacred ground.

_POINT III. Consider how little is known now of their individual
endowments._ To most of the present generation of our younger members
few of the names upon those tombstones recall any former memories. All
that is now appreciated by their successors is the grand cause for which
they lived and died. Their bodily forms, their more or less extensive
knowledge, their wit, their poetic power, their eloquence, their taste
for music, their talent for mathematics, even the distinguished offices
they held, the great services they rendered to the Society and to the
Church at large, all, or at least most of this is forgotten by the
present generation. And so will be the distinctions which you may
acquire during your lifetime to the generations to come. Only that which
pleases the eye of God is of real and lasting value. Reflect whether you
are not too much in love with temporal distinctions. Resolve to make a
thorough self-examination during the three days before you, weighing all
concerns in the balance of eternity.

_Colloquy._ Ask light and grace to make an excellent retreat.


                             MEDITATION II
                     The Field Ripe for the Harvest


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you hear Christ say: “Pray ye the Lord of the
harvest that he send forth laborers into his harvest” (St. Matth. ix,
38).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask grace to renew your spirit of zeal for souls.

_POINT I._ The salvation of souls is the most earnest desire of the
Sacred Heart of Jesus. It was the purpose for which He came down to
earth, which was ever before Him during His private life, His preaching,
His sufferings and His death; and it is still the object of His
intercession for us in Heaven. For He realizes, better than any one
else, the immense interests at stake in saving souls. This is the reason
of His infinite self-humiliation, His boundless self-sacrifice.

This grand work He wishes to be continued by His ministers, to whom He
says: “Feed my lambs, feed my sheep.” To do this work He has ever since
inspired His dearest friends: the Apostles, all missionaries and
pastors, numberless Saints in all ages and all lands.

_POINT II. This eagerness is as earnest with Him to-day as it ever was._
It is so in particular for this land of ours, where the fields are
certainly white for the harvest. And for this work Christ has chosen
you: “You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you; and have appointed
you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and your fruit should
remain” (St. John xv, 16). It would be a deplorable blindness in us if
we failed to understand the importance of the work before us, and not
only a sad but a guilty listlessness if we were to set our minds on
selfish trifles, and not profit by the golden opportunity offered us to
do God’s work and labor generously at the salvation of souls every day
of our lives. Of course you cannot at the present stage of your
religious life, go forth and preach and give missions and bring
non-Catholics into the fold, nor are you urged to do things
extraordinary.

_POINT III. What can you do in your present circumstances to lead
zealous lives? What does God desire of you?_

1. You must acquire thoroughly the spirit of our institute. You are
still in the stage of formation to this spirit. Christ had called His
first disciples with the words: “Come after me, and I will make you
fishers of men” (St. Mark i, 17). So He has called you for the same
purpose. Yet He did not send them at once to preach; He kept them in
training, instructing and directing them. So He is doing with you. Do
not pretend to know better than those put over you; do not criticise and
murmur at any time; but pray much to obtain fully the spirit of our
Society. Do so particularly during this meditation and this whole
triduum.

2. Do the tasks entrusted to you with much zeal and devotedness. All the
labor in which any Jesuit is employed by his superiors bears, in some
way or other, on the salvation of souls. Do all your tasks in that
spirit.

The military recruit, while in training in the barracks, is already
serving his country. His duty is to do it well. You are in the service
of Christ the King. For His sake do all to the best of your power. If He
intrusts to you some care of your neighbor, as He did to His Apostles
and the seventy-two disciples during their time of training, remember it
is God’s work you are doing, as aids to Christ, for the salvation of
precious souls. Do it all carefully, faithfully, making generously the
sacrifices involved in the performance of your duties.

3. Pray for God’s help and His blessings on your labors and on the
labors of your brethren. St. Francis Xavier ascribed his wonderful
success in pagan lands to the prayers of his brethren in Europe; and no
doubt the missionaries of the present day are likewise assisted by the
prayers of the whole Society. This is the very Spirit of the Apostleship
of Prayer, the zealous exercise of which is sufficient to make you all
apostles of the Lord.

_Colloquy._ Lord, what wilt Thou have me do for the great work of saving
souls? Speak, O Lord; Thy servant heareth.


                             MEDITATION III
                           Fraternal Charity


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you hear Christ saying: “By this shall all men
know that you are my disciples if you have love for one another” (St.
John xiii, 35).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask grace to realize fully the importance of practising
fraternal charity.

_POINT I. Consider our strict obligation to observe fraternal charity._

1. Without it there is no sanctifying grace in the soul. St. John
writes: “We know that we have passed from death to life because we love
the brethren. He that loveth not abideth in death. He that hateth his
brother is a murderer” (St. John iii, 14-15).

2. Christ has chosen this commandment as distinctly His own: “A new
commandment I give unto you. Love one another as I have loved you” (St.
John xiii, 34), and again: “This is my commandment that you love one
another as I have loved you” (ib. xv, 12).

3. He makes its observance the distinctive mark of His disciples: “By
this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you have love one
for another” (ib. xiii, 34).

4. Without a delicate fraternal charity many religious communities would
contain some very unhappy members. And our Society in particular has
always shown the greatest solicitude to protect and foster this virtue.

_POINT II. How may fraternal charity be violated?_

Among religious, violations of charity are not so often committed by
actions as they are among seculars, but they are not seldom committed by
word or thought. St. James writes: “In many things we all offend. If any
man offendeth not in word, the same is a perfect man” (iii, 2), and
again: “The tongue no man can tame, an unquiet evil, a deadly poison”
(ib. 8). By calling it a deadly poison, he clearly indicates that the
tongue is often the cause of grievous wrong. Now wilfully to inflict a
grievous wrong on a neighbor is a grievous sin. But even when the wrong
done is of less moment, it is always sinful to some extent. Charity is
violated in many ways.

1. By needlessly saying in the hearing of another words that give him
pain; and that whether he be our equal or our inferior, and still more
if he be our superior.

2. By needlessly making known another’s secret faults.

3. By imputing to another a fault he has not committed; this is called
calumny, or slander, and is a twofold sin, adding the violation of truth
to that of charity.

4. By putting an unfavorable interpretation on a neighbor’s conduct,
expressing it in words.

5. By condemning him in our minds only, beyond the evidence of the
facts; such a judgment is rash, even if it be not false.

6. By needlessly suspecting evil of which there is no good proof.

_POINT III. How we should practise fraternal Charity._

We must earnestly make up our minds, and act on the conviction all our
lives, that the practice of charity is not a mere devotion, highly
recommended but not essential for the attainment of solid virtue. St.
Peter writes: “Before all things have a constant mutual charity among
yourselves” (I Pet. iv, 8). Our Divine Lord in His vivid description of
the Last Judgment lays the chief stress on the duty of charity, and
says: “As long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, you did
it to me” (St. Matth. xxv, 40). Again He says: “Love your enemies, do
good to those who hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them
that calumniate you.... As you would that men should do to you, do you
also to them in like manner” (St. Luke vi, 27-31). And He has made our
generous disposition to forgive others the condition of our own pardon,
teaching us to pray in the Our Father: “Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them who trespass against us.” Through St. Peter He tells us
that: “Charity covers a multitude of sins.” And what is better still,
charity prevents us from committing a multitude of sins. If you can
accustom yourself never to say an unkind word of or to another, nor
think evil of any one, you are on the highroad to sanctity.

_Colloquy._ Beg of our dear Lord the grace of a generous, delicate and
universal charity.


                             MEDITATION IV
                        The Spirit of Sacrifice


_1st Prelude._ Behold the scene on Calvary, as Jesus exclaims: “It is
consummated.”

_2nd Prelude._ Ask eagerly for the spirit of sacrifice.

_POINT I. Consider that all our blessings have been the result of
sacrifices._ When Adam had ruined our race by selfish indulgence, the
Son of God restored us to favor by the most tremendous spirit of
sacrifice. His blessings to mankind were propagated from land to land
and from age to age by men distinguished for the spirit of sacrifice;
the Apostles, the Martyrs, the missionaries, the founders of religious
Orders, the saintly bishops and priests, to the present day. If we wish
to take our share of this glorious task of saving souls, it can only be
done by making sacrifices. The minister of Christ who shirks the toils
and the privations of his vocation produces little fruit: “Unless the
grain of wheat falling into the ground die, itself remaineth alone; but
if it die it bringeth forth much fruit.... If any man minister to me,
let him follow me” (St. John xii, 24-26).

_POINT II. The spirit of sacrifice is necessary for our salvation and
sanctification._

1. For our salvation. For a person who is not accustomed to refuse
himself many, even lawful, indulgences is very likely to fall into
temptations and grievous sins. Therefore Holy Job said: “I made a
covenant with my eyes that I would not so much as think upon a virgin”
(xxxi, 1). On the other hand, Solomon said of himself: “Whatsoever my
eyes desired, I refused them not; and I withheld not my heart from
enjoying every pleasure, and delighting itself in the things which I had
prepared” (Eccles. ii, 10). The result was that Solomon, “the wise man”
by excellence, the special favorite of God at first, fell afterwards
into most grievous sins: “And when he was now old his heart was turned
away by women to follow strange gods ... he worshipped Astarthe .. and
Moloch,” etc. (3 Kings xi, 4-8); and it is not certain that he saved his
soul. History and constant experience teach, by frequent examples, that
the spirit of sacrifice is necessary to secure our salvation. And our
Divine Lord declares in express terms that “The kingdom of heaven
suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away” (St. Matth. xi, 12).

2. This violence, or the spirit of sacrifice, is still more necessary to
work out our sanctification. For this is to be achieved by the imitation
of Christ, who says: “If any one will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow me” (St. Matth. xvi, 24). And
it is an axiom of the spiritual life that one advances in virtue in
proportion to the violence he does to himself. Therefore the religious
life, which is the school of perfection, calls at every step for
generous sacrifices in the observance of that multitude of rules whose
very purpose is the sanctification of the soul by the spirit and the
practice of sacrifice.

_POINT III. How should we practise the spirit of sacrifice?_

1. By carefully observing all our rules. This observance of the rules
implies a multitude of self-sacrifices; so that St. John Berchmans
declared that the common life was his greatest mortification; and the
oration of this Saint’s Office exalts him for his fidelity in the
service of God.

2. By hard labor in performing the duties imposed on us, especially when
these are of an unpleasant kind; for then they require more sacrifice.

3. By rendering all the services we can, even when they are not imposed
on us, making ourselves as useful as possible. It is a common saying
that what is every man’s business is no one’s business, and thus many
services are neglected. But a good religious rather says: this ought to
be done, and no one in particular is appointed to do it; so I must do
it.

4. By making all sacrifices cheerfully: “For God loveth a cheerful
giver” (2 Cor. ix, 7).

_Colloquy._ Ask earnestly for a cheerful spirit of sacrifice.


                              MEDITATION V
                          Become Men of Prayer


_1st Prelude._ Behold Christ rapt in prayer: “He passed the whole night
in the prayer of God” (St. Luke, vi, 12).

_2nd Prelude._ Earnestly ask the grace of becoming a man of prayer.

_POINT I. Consider the importance of praying well._

1. Our life is, or at least ought to be, so very supernatural that it
needs an uncommon amount of grace to lead it properly. Now the ordinary
condition that God requires to impart His grace is prayer, not so much
long prayer as good prayer. If we pray well, we shall undoubtedly
receive much grace.

2. Our days are filled up with distracting occupations, so that long
hours pass in worldly cares or with profane objects of thought, whose
natural tendency is to engross our hearts with worldly affections, and
turn them from the Creator to the creature. Prayer, fervent prayer, is
the most efficient means to counteract this tendency. Without it we soon
lose sight of our highest interests and commit at least venial sins.

3. The good we shall do to the souls of others depends chiefly on
prayer; for as St. Ignatius teaches us, it is from the interior that
force must flow to the exterior for the end proposed to us (Summary,
rule 16).

_POINT II. What aids have we to become men of prayer?_

1. We have the Holy Ghost, who helps us to pray, crying in our hearts
“Abba, Father” (Gal. iv, 6). He is certainly ever ready to help us to
become men of prayer; for we Jesuits are called to this, since it is our
vocation to teach others how to pray, and thus to form spiritual men.

2. We possess a most perfect system of prayer, given us through St.
Ignatius in his Spiritual Exercises. This has been a most rich and
inexhaustible source of spirituality, as is shown in the works of our
writers, and the lives of our Fathers, Scholastics and Brothers through
all the periods of our history.

3. All we need to become men of prayer ourselves is diligent application
to its practice. To obtain distinguished success in any art or science
we need special diligence and a sort of enthusiasm in the practice of
that pursuit. He who earnestly wishes to become a man of prayer,—and we
ought all to desire this,—should make it his special ambition to perform
all his spiritual exercises to the best of his power, and constantly to
ask the Lord for the gift of prayer. What is my conduct in this respect?
Am I really in earnest to acquire that science of the Saints? What
improvements am I going to make in this matter?

_POINT III. What hinders us from being men of prayer?_

Not our duties, as is the case with most worldlings. For, although, as
we have stated before, our outward duties are apt, to some extent, to
turn our minds and hearts from God to creatures, enough time for prayer
is left us to repair our spiritual strength day by day, provided we
perform our meditations, examinations of conscience, etc., with becoming
fervor. In fact, our outward labors, if animated by the proper
intention, which our spiritual exercises constantly inspire, will be
helpful to bring us nearer to God, just as bodily labor helps the food
to promote bodily health. But what hinders us from becoming men of
prayer is:

1. Indolence, which manifests itself in various ways. We may not prepare
the points of meditation over night with proper diligence, or neglect to
call them to mind before falling asleep and again at rising in the
morning. We may fail to rise promptly and neglect the morning visit to
the Blessed Sacrament. We may assume a listless posture during
meditation and at other times of prayer, etc.

2. Inordinate passions; such as ambition, vain glory, sensual
attachments to persons, etc., which keep the imagination and the heart
busy with other things during the time of prayer.

3. Neglect of direct conversation with God while He is giving us an
audience. Prayer supposes that we speak to Him, by acts of adoration,
humility, thanksgiving, petition, contrition, intercession, etc. We need
not say many things but yet we should speak earnestly all along the time
of the exercise, often repeating the same sentiments.

_Colloquy._ Ask for an increase of fidelity and fervor in prayer.


                             MEDITATION VI
                       The Vine and the Branches


_1st Prelude._ Imagine that Christ speaks to you from the altar, and
says: “I am the vine, you the branches; he that abideth in me and I in
Him, the same beareth much fruit” (St. John xv, 5).

_2nd Prelude._ Beg to acquire an intimate union with Christ.

_POINT I. Consider how powerless we are of ourselves to save our souls,
and those of other men._ For Christ says: “As the branch cannot bear
fruit of itself, unless it abide in the vine, so neither can you unless
you abide in me” (Ib. xv, 4). The dogma is this: we can do nothing
profitable for Heaven, unless we possess sanctifying grace and be helped
by actual grace. Now both of these come to us from Christ, who is like
the vine that sends forth its sap into the branches and thus gives life
and fertility. So too we cannot save the souls of others by human
learning or skill, unless Christ co-operates with us by His grace.
Otherwise we are but like sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. If we do
not constantly foster this union with God, we waste much labor, as we
shall, no doubt, find at our death we have often done.

_POINT II. Consider on the other hand how powerful we are when assisted
by the grace of God._ For Christ says: “He that abideth in me and I in
him, the same beareth much fruit.” How so? By the Divine power which
then makes use of us to do its peculiar work of sanctification for
ourselves and others. Christ adds: “In this is my Father glorified, that
you bring forth very much fruit” (ib. xv, 8). “I have chosen you and
have appointed you, that you should go and should bring forth fruit and
your fruit should remain” (ib. v, 16).

Our labors thus become His labors, as the sap of the vine produces the
fruit in the branches. Besides, when our will is one with Christ’s will,
our prayers become most powerful, as He adds, saying: “If you abide in
me and my words abide in you, you shall ask whatever you will, and it
shall be done unto you” (ib. xv, 7).

_POINT III. How do we strengthen this supernatural union with Christ?_
He has deigned to tell us this also, saying: “If you keep my
commandments, you shall abide in my love; as I also have kept my
Father’s commandments, and do abide in his love” (xv, 10).

How consoling all this doctrine is! He adds again: “You are my friends
if you do the things that I command you” (xv, 14). All we need do then
to achieve the most glorious results for our salvation and that of
others is to be obedient to His voice.

_POINT IV. Consider the absolute necessity of this union with Christ._
For He assures us of this, saying: “If any one abide not in me, he shall
be cast forth as a branch and shall wither; and they shall gather him up
and cast him into the fire, and he burneth.” This is the lot of all who
die in mortal sin, no matter how holy they may have been before. Read
the 15th chapter of Ezechiel.

_Colloquy._ O Jesus, may this triduum unite me more firmly with Thee.
What wilt Thou have me do?




                               TRIDUUM F


                              MEDITATION I
                              On the Vows


_1st Prelude._ Imagine the scene of your first vows—the ceremony is very
simple, the meaning very solemn.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask a full appreciation of the meaning.

_POINT I. Consider the choice made by Jesus._

1. While on earth Jesus chose His Apostles: “Come ye after me, and I
will make you to be fishers of men” (St. Matth. iv, 19); meaning: I will
make you my co-laborers in the grandest of all works; “I have chosen
you, that you should go and that you should bring forth fruit, and your
fruit should remain” (St. John xv, 16), fruit for eternity. The Apostles
could not then realize the honor offered them.

2. Christ meant to make their hearts like to His own in holiness,
filling them with love for God and men, generosity, humility, mildness,
fidelity, etc.

3. He meant to make them ornaments of Heaven, the twelve great
constellations of the celestial Paradise. Then consider that the same
Blessed Saviour has chosen you for the same three purposes. Acts of
thanks, self-abasement: “I, although most unworthy, prostrate before the
feet of thy Divine majesty, etc.”

_POINT II. Consider what were your sentiments at the time of your first
vows._ They were most earnest and sincere. You were of age, you knew the
real meaning, you had been tried, you had full liberty to accept
Christ’s offers or to refuse them, you were enlightened by the grace of
God and supported by His aid.

Yours were solemn words: “I do vow before the most sacred Virgin Mary,
and the whole court of Heaven, to Thy Divine Majesty, perpetual Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience, etc.” These vows effected a solemn consecration
of your person, made you sacred, like chalices, their violation a
sacrilege. These days are to prepare in you proper sentiments to renew
this pledge of a sacred Knighthood, like St. Ignatius’s _night watch of
arms_ at Mont Serrat, really espousals with the Son of God. The breaking
of such a contract is horrible before God and men. An unfaithful
religious is like a false coin—apparently gold, really brass.

_POINT III. Have we been faithful?_ There can be no doubt of our
original sincerity. Our self-immolation was sincere and generous; God
supported us. Have we been living up to the lofty ideals with which we
started out? Thousands before us have done so; thousands are doing so
to-day; thousands are being prepared by the Holy Spirit to do the same.

These days are assigned us by our Society to examine carefully how we
stand. If we find defects, we are now to correct them. We must begin the
task by a careful self-examination. This is a visit, not of a Father
Provincial or Father General, but of the Holy Ghost Himself to the
hearts of all.

No doubt you are faithful in many things; see whether you are faithful
in all things. Imagine the Holy Spirit addresses you in the words spoken
in the Apocalypse to the Bishop of Ephesus, saying: “I know thy works
and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them that
are evil.... And thou hast patience, and hast endured for my name, and
hast not fainted. But I have somewhat against thee.” Then consider
whether you find really in your conduct something that needs special
looking after during these three days.

_Colloquy_, according to the sentiments thus excited in your mind.


                             MEDITATION II
                          The Vow of Chastity


_1st Prelude._ See Christ in Heaven surrounded by a bright crowd of
intimate friends (Apoc. vii, 9).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for the most delicate purity of heart.

_POINT I._ Chastity is a most precious treasure. It was bestowed on Adam
and Eve in Paradise: “They were both naked, to wit Adam and Eve, and
they were not ashamed” (Gen. ii, 25). On the other hand, when “All flesh
had corrupted its way” (Gen. vi, 12) the Deluge showed the indignation
of God; and, soon after, to punish impurity, “The Lord rained upon Sodom
and Gomorha brimstone and fire ... and he destroyed these cities” (Gen.
xix, 24, 25).

When the Son of God was about to come down and become a child of this
sin-stained race, He prepared for Himself a temple of purity in the
Blessed Virgin Mary. His favorite friends were chaste virginal souls,
St. Joseph, St. John the Baptist, St. John the Apostle; and His other
Apostles too left their wives and all things to follow Him. One of His
first teachings was: “Blessed are the clean of heart” (St. Matth. v, 8).
To teach the sanctity becoming the human body, it is anointed with
sacred oil at Baptism and Confirmation, fed with the Divine Bread at
Holy Communion, incensed at Solemn Mass and at burial, and laid in
consecrated ground to rise again in glory. How we ought to respect this
vessel of election!

_POINT II._ We have been selected from among thousands to constitute the
virgin band of Christ’s intimate friends. These are Divine nuptials of
Jesus with the consecrated virgin soul, united together into closest
union. To this holiness impurity is diametrically opposed. As adultery
is the grossest sin against the sacred bond of matrimony, so is impurity
the most degrading vice against the religious state; and as in St.
Matthew’s Gospel (xix, 9) marital infidelity is a just cause for
rejection of the guilty party, so Jesus rejects the impure. The Book of
Wisdom also declares that “Wisdom will not dwell in a body subject to
sins” (i, 4).

_POINT III. Means to protect and perfect purity._

1. _Prayer._ The Book of Wisdom says: “As I knew that I could not
otherwise be continent except God gave it, and this also was a point of
wisdom to know whose gift it was, I went to the Lord and besought him”
(viii, 21). This is one strong reason why religious should do so much
more praying than seculars, that they are vowed to a life of perpetual
purity. In particular there is need in this matter of habitual recourse
to prayer at every assault of temptation.

2. _The practice of mortification_; for to the spirit of impurity apply
the words of Christ: “This kind can go out by nothing but by prayer and
fasting” (St. Mark ix, 28).

3. Modesty of all the senses, especially of the eyes: “I made a covenant
with my eyes, that I would not so much as think upon a virgin,” said
Holy Job (xxxi, 1), clearly indicating that the source of evil thoughts
lies chiefly in the objects presented to the eyes.

4. _Avoiding the occasions_ of temptations; for, while many other
passions are best subdued by direct resistance to their promptings, that
of lust must be overcome by flight. Therefore Ecclesiasticus warns us
that “he that loveth danger shall perish in it” (iii, 27). Few servants
of God had shown such heroic proofs of fidelity to duty amid multiplied
and protracted trials as had King David; and yet the imprudence with
which he exposed himself to an impure temptation made him in a few days
an adulterer, a tyrant and a murderer, and filled his remaining years of
life with bitter sufferings.

We must carefully consider in every retreat how faithfully we make use
of these various protections of angelic chastity; for “We have this
treasure in earthen vessels” (2 Cor. iv, 7).

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord and His Holy Mother.


                             MEDITATION III
                          The Vow of Obedience


_1st Prelude._ Behold Christ learning a trade from St. Joseph.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for high appreciation of obedience.

_POINT I. Consider that all human beings must obey._ A wise God must
establish order in all His works; hence the maxim: “Order is Heaven’s
first law.” The material universe obeys the law of gravitation, the
moral universe obeys the law of subordination of wills of inferiors to
superiors, that is the law of obedience. Common sense teaches all
mankind that children must obey their parents, servants their masters,
subjects their lords, etc. When God came to share your nature, He put
Himself to obey, and carried this virtue to the highest perfection,
“becoming obedient unto death, even to the death of the cross” (Phil.
ii, 8). In positive legislation God has made this law universal. The
Fourth Commandment directly enforces it (Ex. xx, 12). The law of
Deuteronomy is still more forcible, saying: “He that will be proud and
refuse to obey the commandment of the priest who ministereth at the time
to the Lord thy God, and the decree of the judge, that man shall die,
and thou shalt take away the evil from Israel” (xvii, 12); and laying
down the law for sacred services, God inflicted a sudden and disgraceful
death on two young priests for using common instead of sacred fire
(Levit. x, 1-3). He wished to set an example for all future ages.

_POINT II. Obedience is the characteristic virtue of our Society._ At
the time of the Protestant Reformation there was a widespread spirit of
rebellion against the authority of God; independence replaced obedience.
The Holy Ghost then inspired St. Ignatius to institute a religious Order
whose characteristic virtue should be that of obedience. He had been a
brave soldier, and he wished to assemble a band of men, a company
obeying orders with the promptness, punctuality and generosity of
soldiers ever in active warfare. “Especially I desire,” he writes, “to
see you most perfect in the virtue of obedience.” His letter on
Obedience is the greatest masterpiece written on this matter, and his
Institute is the most perfect exhibition of this virtue in action. It
is, in fact, a close imitation of the obedient life of the God
Incarnate. None but very obedient men are true Jesuits. Father
Franciosi, in his work “The Spirit of St. Ignatius,” has collected
thirty pages of eulogies pronounced by the Saint on this his favorite
virtue (pp. 61 to 92). He calls it “the noblest and most beautiful
virtue,” “the sweetest sacrifice, most pleasing to the Divine Majesty,”
“a kind of martyrdom.” He writes: “Obedience ennobles and elevates man
greatly above his condition, causing him to put off self and to put on
God, the sovereign good, who is accustomed to fill the soul so much the
more as He finds it less occupied with self-will; so that those who have
reached this state may truly, provided they obey from the bottom of
their hearts, say with the Apostle: ‘I live, now not I, but Christ
liveth in me.’”

_POINT III. How perfect ought our obedience to be?_

I. _In the execution_, it must be prompt, leaving even a letter
unfinished; exact, rendered with military precision; generous, shirking
no difficulty; universal in all things commanded and even at a mere sign
of a superior’s will without an express command; without show of
reluctance, as a corpse is moved or an old man’s staff employed.

2. _In the will_, which is exchanged for the will of the superior, so
that there can be no conflict of wills.

3. _In the judgment_, “as far as a devout will can bend the
understanding,” says St. Ignatius, which can always be done when there
is no compelling evidence to the contrary. Hence never any criticism,
but such docility as the child Jesus showed when taught by St. Joseph
the rules of his trade without suggesting any improvement.

_Colloquy_ with our dear Lord, asking for perfect obedience.


                             MEDITATION IV
                        On Strength of Character


_1st Prelude. Recall the words of St. Paul_: “Be not overcome by evil,
but overcome evil by good” (Rom. xii, 21).

_2nd Prelude._ Ask to improve in vigor of character.

_POINT I. What is strength of character?_ It is power of the will to
control one’s own actions, independently of one’s inclinations and of
the opinions of men. A weak character is led by mere feelings. These
must be brought under control, conquered by the strength of the will and
made to obey the dictate of reason. For this purpose we must resist our
inclinations: “_Vince teipsum_,” “Conquer thyself”; “_Tantum profeceris
quantum tibi vim intuleris_,” “Your progress will be proportioned to
your self-victories,” are undoubted maxims. And Christ says in the
Apocalypse: “To him that shall overcome I will give to sit with me in my
throne” (iii, 21).

What must we overcome? Whatever we find during the triduum to be
disorderly in our daily conduct. Examine your rising at the first
signal, your morning visit, meditation, hearing of Mass, reception of
Holy Communion, and all the successive actions of the day. Resolve to
correct what is faulty, to supply what is wanting, etc. Mere wishes are
worthless; you must set to work.

_POINT II. Whence comes strength of character?_

1. It is of course, like every precious power, a gift of God: “Every
best gift, and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the
Father of light” (St. James i, 17). Like all other gifts of God, it can
be increased by earnest and persevering prayer. Many are fond of
frequently repeating the petition: “Lord, grant me the grace of doing
what Thou commandest, and then command what Thou wilt.”

2. But it is not all a gift of God. Our will is free; nothing is so
truly our own as our will. Even God will not control it. Being an
immaterial power, it is not affected by sickness nor old age, as is
evident from the heroism of the Martyrs.

3. A person’s character may undergo great changes. Thus we read of St.
Francis of Sales that his gentleness of temper was the result of
strenuous and continuous efforts. In St. Ignatius “Unalterable calmness
was the result of his vigorous perseverance in combatting the
irascibility to which his constitution much inclined him” (Franciosi,
Spir. of St. Ign., p. 149).

4. Often men of strong passions make most progress in virtue, as St.
Ignatius found in Peter Ribadineira and Edmund Auger, who triumphed over
great defects of character (Ib., p. 141).

_POINT III. How is strength of character increased or diminished?_ This
is chiefly effected by the successive acts of our free will. Every
virtuous act strengthens our power of doing such virtuous acts again,
and every yielding to our passions strengthens those passions, and in
the same proportion weakens our power of resistance to their promptings.
For habits are formed by the repetition of acts, and habits become like
a second nature. We are all bundles of habits; the habits determine the
cast of character.

It is proper for each one to examine during the triduum whether he is
now different from what he was at former times; for instance, at the
completion of his novitiate or his entrance on more active duties—better
or worse. We cannot long remain just the same. The religious life is
like rowing against the current of a river: if we cease rowing, we are
carried back. What is my present condition of fidelity to duty, of zeal,
charity, obedience, piety, etc.?

_Colloquy_, as the occasion suggests.


                              MEDITATION V
                       On Co-operation with Grace


_1st Prelude._ Imagine you see the thousands of happy souls in Heaven
who worked out their salvation in our Society while on earth.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for abundant grace to follow in their footsteps.

_POINT I. What manner of men were they on earth?_

They were very much like ourselves. They had the same human passions to
control, the same rules to observe, the same labors to perform, the same
sacrifices to make, etc. And to help them along they had the same aids
that we have: the same loving Lord, who had called them from amid the
dangers of the world, as He has called us; the same training by the
Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius, the same holy Sacraments, the same
everything; not of course in the same proportion for every individual
soul; but enough of grace for all to live up to our grand vocation, and
in due time to be with our blessed brethren in Heaven, as we are now
their associates in the Society of Jesus on earth.

_POINT II. To what do those happy souls owe their success?_

The same grace of God in their case and in ours being presupposed, they
owed their success to their faithful co-operation. The grace of God is
in the matter of sanctification, what the spring is in a watch. All the
movements of the wheels and the hands come from the spring; when that
breaks all the other parts come to a perfect standstill. The powers of
our body and soul are like the wheels of the watch which must work along
with the spring to indicate the correct time. And of them one is free,
namely our will. When our free will co-operates with grace, we lead holy
lives. The spring of God’s grace never fails; the only fear of failure
regards our own free will. Now the purpose of this triduum is to examine
how faithfully our will is seconding the promptings of grace. In this
meditation we must ask God’s light to understand the real condition of
our soul, and next examine our conduct with care, to see whether our
lives are up to the standard of faithful and fervent religious. How is
God pleased with us? How are our superiors and our brethren in religion
satisfied? Has any one a right to complain of us? What improvement can
we make?

_POINT III. How can we obtain an increase of grace?_ By prayer and
faithful co-operation.

1. _Prayer_ is the universal means by which all blessings can be
obtained: “Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full” (St.
John xvi, 24). But of course we must pray fervently and perseveringly;
careless prayer leads to tepidity and loss of grace, rather than its
increase. How fervently have I been praying of late?

2. Co-operation with graces given me is the most efficient means of
obtaining a further supply of grace. And in proportion as graces abound
the service of God is facilitated, and thus again further graces are
secured: _Facile equitat quem gratia Dei portat_, “he rides along with
ease who is carried up by the grace of God,” is a familiar axiom. On the
other hand, the want of co-operation with the grace given us makes us
unworthy of a future liberal supply of God’s help, and gradually leads a
soul into tepidity, with all its serious consequences. We may be much
encouraged to improve ourselves in these two means of sanctification,
namely prayer and co-operation with grace, by frequently recalling to
mind the examples set us by the Saints of our Society. These two means
made them Saints and the same means will make us Saints, if we employ
them with the same earnestness and perseverance as they did. Pray like
the Saints, co-operate with the grace of God as the Saints habitually
did, and you will soon be holy yourselves.

_Colloquy_ with Jesus and Mary, to obtain great progress in the
imitation of the Saints.


                             MEDITATION VI
                     The Perfection of Our Actions


_1st Prelude._ Behold our Divine Lord as a youth occupied in humble
labor.

_2nd Prelude._ Ask for light and strength of will to do all things well.

_POINT I. The life of Christ is summed up in the words, “He hath done
all things well,” Bene omnia fecit_ (St. Mark vii, 37).

For Jesuits these words contain a most safe, most effective and most
comprehensive rule of action. This follows from the fact that our life
is directly intended to be a close imitation of the life of Christ
Himself. Such was certainly the grand ideal of our founder, St.
Ignatius. The perfection he teaches is the imitation of Christ; and the
entire life of Christ is described in this statement, “He did all things
well.” Any one of Ours who aims steadily at this practise is on the
highroad to perfection; and one who does so throughout his life is a
real saint. To such persons applies the saying of Father Isidore
Boudreaux, S.J., which is quoted in our Menology: “The good novice makes
the good scholastic and the good scholastic makes the good priest.”
Without this aim the pursuit of perfection is an illusion.

_POINT II. In this pursuit of sanctity we have no time to lose._ See how
much was done in a short time by our young Saints, Aloysius, Stanislaus,
Berchmans, and really by all our great models. For instance, St. Francis
had only ten years given him to accomplish his grand success in India
and Japan. Very many of the Saints fulfilled a long space in a short
time; a St. Catherine of Sienna, who benefited the Church so
conspicuously, died at the age of 33 years. The career of any of you may
be much briefer than you expect; but no matter how brief it be, it will
be a very successful one if you do all things well.

_POINT III. What is required to do all things well?_ It requires:

1. A good motive on all occasions; for the end specifies the act,
determines its moral nature. In all your actions seek purely God’s
glory, the good of souls, the will of God, or any purpose that the faith
proposes to us. “Whether you eat or drink, or whatever else you do, do
all to the glory of God,” wrote St. Paul (I Cor. x, 31). It is not so
much the offering of our actions to God that is here recommended, but
rather the aiming in all we do at a supernatural effect. This higher aim
renders our acts pleasing to God and meritorious for ourselves.

2. Attention to the least details of what you do, striving to impart to
it the highest perfection you can. Thus the perfection of any work of
art depends, not on the general outline only, but rather on the beauty
imparted to every portion of the production, be it a painting, a statue,
a literary composition, etc.

3. Careful avoidance of all negligent or defective work. For indulgence
in carelessness not only spoils the task actually in hand, but also
renders us less disposed to act well on subsequent occasions. Every
moral fault we commit fosters an evil habit. Let me examine with care
with what perfection I have lately been accustomed to perform my
actions, and resolve to amend all that needs correction.

_Colloquy_, according to the present condition of my soul.


THE END OF THE TRIDUUMS




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

##############################################################################
## SELF MASTERY THROUGH CONSCIOUS AUTOSUGGESTION — Emile Coue (1922) — autosuggestion formulas, imagination-over-will principle, induction phrasing
##############################################################################

Produced by Ruth Hart




[Note:  many of the people quoted in this text are identified only by
their initials along with either a dash or three periods.  For
consistency's sake, I have used four dashes for each person instead
of periods.  I have also added quotation marks where appropriate.
Finally, I have made the following spelling change: I congraulate
you to I congratulate you.]



SELF MASTERY THROUGH CONSCIOUS
AUTOSUGGESTION

by

EMILE COUE


AMERICAN LIBRARY SERVICE
PUBLISHERS
500 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK


Copyright 1922
_by_
AMERICAN LIBRARY SERVICE
_All Translation Rights Reserved_


CONTENTS

Self Mastery Through Conscious Autosuggestion, by _Emile Coue_    5
Thoughts and Precepts, by _Emile Coue_                           36
Observations on What Autosuggestion Can Do, by _Emile Coue_      43
Education As It Ought To Be, by _Emile Coue_                     50
A Survey of the "Seances" at M. Emile Coue's                     55
Letters from Patients Treated by the Coue Method         62, 72, 75
The Miracle Within, by _M. Burnet-Provins_                       80
Some Notes on the Journey of M. Coue to Paris in October, 1919   85
Everything for Everyone! by Mme. Emile Leon                      88


[Illustration of Emile Coue]


SELF MASTERY THROUGH CONSCIOUS
AUTOSUGGESTION

Suggestion, or rather Autosuggestion, is quite a new subject, and yet
at the same time it is as old as the world.

It is new in the sense that until now it has been wrongly studied and
in consequence wrongly understood; it is old because it dates from
the appearance of man on the earth. In fact autosuggestion is an
instrument that we possess at birth, and in this instrument, or rather
in this force, resides a marvelous and incalculable power, which
according to circumstances produces the best or the worst results.
Knowledge of this force is useful to each one of us, but it is
peculiarly indispensable to doctors, magistrates, lawyers, and to
those engaged in the work of education.

By knowing how to practise it _consciously_ it is possible in the
first place to avoid provoking in others bad autosuggestions which
may have disastrous consequences, and secondly, consciously to
provoke good ones instead, thus bringing physical health to the sick,
and moral health to the neurotic and the erring, the unconscious
victims of anterior autosuggestions, and to guide into the right path
those who had a tendency to take the wrong one.


THE CONSCIOUS SELF AND THE UNCONSCIOUS SELF

In order to understand properly the phenomena of suggestion, or to
speak more correctly of autosuggestion, it is necessary to know that
two absolutely distinct selves exist within us. Both are intelligent,
but while one is conscious the other is unconscious. For this reason
the existence of the latter generally escapes notice. It is however
easy to prove its existence if one merely takes the trouble to
examine certain phenomena and to reflect a few moments upon
them. Let us take for instance the following examples:

Every one has heard of somnambulism; every one knows that a
somnambulist gets up at night _without waking_, leaves his room
after either dressing himself or not, goes downstairs, walks along
corridors, and after having executed certain acts or accomplished
certain work, returns to his room, goes to bed again, and shows next
day the greatest astonishment at finding work finished which he had
left unfinished the day before.

It is however he himself who has done it without being aware of it.
What force has his body obeyed if it is not an unconscious force, in
fact his unconscious self?

Let us now examine the alas, too frequent case of a drunkard
attacked by _delirium tremens_. As though seized with madness he
picks up the nearest weapon, knife, hammer, or hatchet, as the case
may be, and strikes furiously those who are unlucky enough to be in
his vicinity. Once the attack is over, he recovers his senses and
contemplates with horror the scene of carnage around him, without
realizing that he himself is the author of it. Here again is it not the
unconscious self which has caused the unhappy man to act in this
way? [*]

[*] And what aversions, what ills we create for ourselves, everyone
of us and in every domain by not "immediately" bringing into play
"good conscious autosuggestions" against our "bad unconscious
autosuggestions," thus bringing about the disappearance of all unjust
suffering.

If we compare the conscious with the unconscious self we see that
the conscious self is often possessed of a very unreliable memory
while the unconscious self on the contrary is provided with a
marvelous and impeccable memory which registers without our
knowledge the smallest events, the least important acts of our
existence. Further, it is credulous and accepts with unreasoning
docility what it is told. Thus, as it is the unconscious that is
responsible for the functioning of all our organs but the intermediary
of the brain, a result is produced which may seem rather paradoxical
to you: that is, if it believes that a certain organ functions well or ill
or that we feel such and such an impression, the organ in question
does indeed function well or ill, or we do feel that impression.

Not only does the unconscious self preside over the functions of our
organism, but also over _all our actions whatever they are_. It is
this that we call imagination, and it is this which, contrary to
accepted opinion, _always_ makes us act even, and _above all_,
against _our will_ when there is antagonism between these two
forces.


WILL AND IMAGINATION

If we open a dictionary and look up the word "will", we find this
definition: "The faculty of freely determining certain acts". We
accept this definition as true and unattackable, although nothing
could be more false. This will that we claim so proudly, always
_yields_ to the imagination. It is an _absolute_ rule that admits of no
_exception_.

"Blasphemy! Paradox!" you will exclaim. "Not at all! On the
contrary, it is the purest truth," I shall reply.

In order to convince yourself of it, open your eyes, look round you
and try to understand what you see. You will then come to the
conclusion that what I tell you is not an idle theory, offspring of a
sick brain but the simple expression of a _fact_.

Suppose that we place on the ground a plank 30 feet long by 1 foot
wide. It is evident that everybody will be capable of going from one
end to the other of this plank without stepping over the edge. But
now change the conditions of the experiment, and imagine this plank
placed at the height of the towers of a cathedral. Who then will be
capable of advancing even a few feet along this narrow path? Could
you hear me speak? Probably not. Before you had taken two steps
you would begin to tremble, and _in spite of every effort of your
will_ you would be certain to fall to the ground.

Why is it then that you would not fall if the plank is on the ground,
and why should you fall if it is raised to a height above the ground?
Simply because in the first case you imagine that it is easy to go to
the end of this plank, while in the second case you _imagine_ that
you _cannot_ do so.

Notice that your will is powerless to make you advance; if you
_imagine_ that you _cannot_, it is _absolutely_ impossible for you
to do so. If tilers and carpenters are able to accomplish this feat, it is
because they think they can do it.

Vertigo is entirely caused by the picture we make in our minds that
we are going to fall. This picture transforms itself immediately into
fact _in spite of all the efforts of our will_, and the more violent
these efforts are, the quicker is the opposite to the desired result
brought about.

Let us now consider the case of a person suffering from insomnia. If
he does not make any effort to sleep, he will lie quietly in bed. If on
the contrary he tries to force himself to sleep by his _will_, the
more efforts he makes, the more restless he becomes.

Have you not noticed that the more you try to remember the name of
a person which you have forgotten, the more it eludes you, until,
substituting in your mind the idea "I shall remember in a minute" to
the idea "I have forgotten", the name comes back to you of its own
accord without the least effort?

Let those of you who are cyclists remember the days when you were
learning to ride. You went along clutching the handle bars and
frightened of falling. Suddenly catching sight of the smallest
obstacle in the road you tried to avoid it, and the more efforts you
made to do so, the more surely you rushed upon it.

Who has not suffered from an attack of uncontrollable laughter,
which bursts out more violently the more one tries to control it?

What was the state of mind of each person in these different
circumstances? "_I do not want_ to fall but I _cannot help_ doing
so"; "I _want_ to sleep but I _cannot_ "; "I _want_ to remember the
name of Mrs. So and So, but I _cannot_ "; "I _want_ to avoid the
obstacle, but I _cannot_ "; "I _want_ to stop laughing, but I
_cannot_."

As you see, in each of these conflicts it is always the _imagination_
which gains the victory over the _will_, without any exception.

To the same order of ideas belongs the case of the leader who rushes
forward at the head of his troops and always carries them along with
him, while the cry "Each man for himself!" is almost certain to
cause a defeat. Why is this? It is because in the first case the men
_imagine_ that they must go _forward_, and in the second they
_imagine_ that they are conquered and must fly for their lives.

Panurge was quite aware of the contagion of example, that is to say
the action of the imagination, when, to avenge himself upon a
merchant on board the same boat, he bought his biggest sheep and
threw it into the sea, certain beforehand that the entire flock would
follow, which indeed happened.

We human beings have a certain resemblance to sheep, and
involuntarily, we are irresistibly impelled to follow other people's
examples, _imagining_ that we cannot do otherwise.

I could quote a thousand other examples but I should fear to bore
you by such an enumeration. I cannot however pass by in silence
this fact which shows the enormous power of the imagination, or in
other words of the unconscious in its struggle against the _will_.

There are certain drunkards who wish to give up drinking, but who
cannot do so. Ask them, and they will reply in all sincerity that they
desire to be sober, that drink disgusts them, but that they are
irresistibly impelled to drink against their _will_, in spite of the
harm they know it will do them.

In the same way certain criminals commit crimes _in spite of
themselves_, and when they are asked why they acted so, they
answer "I could not help it, something impelled me, it was stronger
than I."

And the drunkard and the criminal speak the truth; they are forced to
do what they do, for the simple reason they imagine they cannot
prevent themselves from doing so. Thus we who are so proud of our
will, who believe that we are free to act as we like, are in reality
nothing but wretched puppets of which our imagination holds all the
strings. We only cease to be puppets when we have learned to guide
our imagination.


SUGGESTION AND AUTOSUGGESTION

According to the preceding remarks we can compare the
imagination to a torrent which fatally sweeps away the poor wretch
who has fallen into it, in spite of his efforts to gain the bank. This
torrent seems indomitable; but if you know how, you can turn it
from its course and conduct it to the factory, and there you can
transform its force into movement, heat, and electricity.

If this simile is not enough, we may compare the imagination--"the
madman at home" as it has been called--to an unbroken horse which
has neither bridle nor reins. What can the rider do except let himself
go wherever the horse wishes to take him? And often if the latter
runs away, his mad career only comes to end in the ditch. If however
the rider succeeds in putting a bridle on the horse, the parts are
reversed. It is no longer the horse who goes where he likes, it is the
rider who obliges the horse to take him wherever he wishes to go.

Now that we have learned to realize the enormous power of the
unconscious or imaginative being, I am going to show how this self,
hitherto considered indomitable, can be as easily controlled as a
torrent or an unbroken horse. But before going any further it is
necessary to define carefully two words that are often used without
being properly understood. These are the words _suggestion_ and
_autosuggestion_.

What then is suggestion? It may be defined as "the act of imposing
an idea on the brain of another". Does this action really exist?
Properly speaking, no. Suggestion does not indeed exist by itself. It
does not and cannot exist except on the _sine qua non_ condition of
transforming itself into _autosuggestion_ in the subject. This latter
word may be defined as "the implanting of an idea in oneself by
oneself."

You may make a suggestion to someone; if the unconscious of the
latter does not accept the suggestion, if it has not, as it were,
digested it, in order to transform it into _autosuggestion_, it
produces no result. I have myself occasionally made a more or less
commonplace suggestion to ordinarily very obedient subjects quite
unsuccessfully. The reason is that the unconscious of the subject
refused to accept it and did not transform it into _autosuggestion_.


THE USE OF AUTOSUGGESTION

Let us now return to the point where I said that we can control and
lead our imagination, just as a torrent or an unbroken horse can be
controlled. To do so, it is enough in the first place to know that this
is possible (of which fact almost everyone is ignorant) and secondly,
to know by what means it can be done. Well, the means is very
simple; it is that which we have used every day since we came into
the world, without wishing or knowing it and absolutely
unconsciously, but which unfortunately for us, we often use wrongly
and to our own detriment. This means is _autosuggestion_.

Whereas we constantly give ourselves unconscious autosuggestions,
all we have to do is to give ourselves conscious ones, and the
process consists in this: first, to weigh carefully in one's mind the
things which are to be the object of the autosuggestion, and
according as they require the answer "yes" or "no" to repeat several
times without thinking of anything else: "This thing is coming", or
"this thing is going away"; "this thing will, or will not happen, etc.,
etc. . . ." [*] If the unconscious accepts this suggestion and
transforms it into an autosuggestion, the thing or things are realized
in every particular.

[*] Of course the thing must be in our power.

Thus understood, _autosuggestion_ is nothing but hypnotism as I
see it, and I would define it in these simple words: _The influence of
the imagination upon the moral and physical being of mankind_.
Now this influence is undeniable, and without returning to previous
examples, I will quote a few others.

If you persuade yourself that you can do a certain thing, provided
this thing be _possible_, you will do it however difficult it may be.
If on the contrary you _imagine_ that you cannot do the simplest
thing in the world, it is impossible for you to do it, and molehills
become for you unscalable mountains.

Such is the case of neurasthenics, who, believing themselves
incapable of the least effort, often find it impossible even to walk a
few steps without being exhausted. And these same neurasthenics
sink more deeply into their depression, the more efforts they make
to throw it off, like the poor wretch in the quicksands who sinks in
all the deeper the more he tries to struggle out.

In the same way it is sufficient to think a pain is going, to feel it
indeed disappear little by little, and inversely, it is enough to think
that one suffers in order to feel the pain begin to come immediately.

I know certain people who predict in advance that they will have a
sick headache on a certain day, in certain circumstances, and on that
day, in the given circumstances, sure enough, they feel it. They
brought their illness on themselves, just as others cure theirs by
_conscious autosuggestion_.

I know that one generally passes for mad in the eyes of the world if
one dares to put forward ideas which it is not accustomed to hear.
Well, at the risk of being thought so, I say that if certain people are
ill mentally and physically, it is that they _imagine_ themselves to
be ill mentally or physically. If certain others are paralytic without
having any lesion to account for it, it is that they _imagine_
themselves to be paralyzed, and it is among such persons that the
most extraordinary cures are produced. If others again are happy or
unhappy, it is that they imagine themselves to be so, for it is possible
for two people in exactly the same circumstances to be, the one
_perfectly happy_, the other _absolutely wretched_.

Neurasthenia, stammering, aversions, kleptomania, certain cases of
paralysis, are nothing but the result of unconscious autosuggestion,
that is to say the result of the action of the _unconscious_ upon the
physical and moral being.

But if our unconscious is the source of many of our ills, it can also
bring about the cure of our physical and mental ailments. It can not
only repair the ill it has done, but cure real illnesses, so strong is its
action upon our organism.

Shut yourself up alone in a room, seat yourself in an armchair, close
your eyes to avoid any distraction, and concentrate your mind for a
few moments on thinking: "Such and such a thing is going to
disappear", or "Such and such a thing is coming to pass."

If you have really made the autosuggestion, that is to say, if your
unconscious has assimilated the idea that you have presented to it,
you are astonished to see the thing you have thought come to pass.
(Note that it is the property of ideas autosuggested to exist within us
unrecognized, and we can only know of their existence by the effect
they produce.) But above all, and this is an essential point, the will
must not be brought into play in practising autosuggestion; for, if it
is not in agreement with the imagination, if one thinks: "I will make
such and such a thing happen", and the imagination says: "You are
willing it, but it is not going to be", not only does one not obtain
what one wants, but even exactly the reverse is brought about.

This remark is of capital importance, and explains why results are so
unsatisfactory when, in treating moral ailments, one strives to
_re-educate_ the will. It is the _training of the imagination_ which is
necessary, and it is thanks to this shade of difference that my method
has often succeeded where others--and those not the least
considered--have failed. From the numerous experiments that I have
made daily for twenty years, and which I have examined with
minute care, I have been able to deduct the following conclusions
which I have summed up as laws:

1. When the will and the imagination are antagonistic, it is always
the imagination which wins, _without any exception_.

2. In the conflict between the will and the imagination, the force of
the imagination is in _direct ratio to the square of the will_.

3. When the will and the imagination are in agreement, one does not
add to the other, but one is multiplied by the other.

4. The imagination can be directed.

(The expressions "In direct ratio to the square of the will" and "Is
multiplied by" are not rigorously exact. They are simply illustrations
destined to make my meaning clearer.)

After what has just been said it would seem that nobody ought to be
ill. That is quite true. Every illness, whatever it may be, _can_ yield
to _autosuggestion_, daring and unlikely as my statement may seem;
I do not say _does always yield_, but _can yield_, which is a
different thing.

But in order to lead people to practise conscious autosuggestion they
must be taught how, just as they are taught to read or write or play
the piano.

_Autosuggestion_ is, as I said above, an instrument that we possess
at birth, and with which we play unconsciously all our life, as a baby
plays with its rattle. It is however a dangerous instrument; it can
wound or even kill you if you handle it imprudently and
unconsciously. It can on the contrary save your life when you know
how to employ it _consciously_. One can say of it as Aesop said of
the tongue: "It is at the same time the best and the worst thing in the
world".

I am now going to show you how everyone can profit by the
beneficent action of _autosuggestion_ consciously applied. In saying
"every one", I exaggerate a little, for there are two classes of persons
in whom it is difficult to arouse conscious autosuggestion:

1. The mentally undeveloped who are not capable of understanding
what you say to them.

2. _Those who are unwilling to understand_.


HOW TO TEACH PATIENTS TO MAKE AUTOSUGGESTIONS

The principle of the method may be summed up in these few words:
_It is impossible to think of two things at once_, that is to say that
two ideas may be in juxtaposition, but they cannot be superimposed
in our mind.

_Every thought entirely filling our mind becomes true for us and
tends to transform itself into action_.

Thus if you can make a sick person think that her trouble is getting
better, it will disappear; if you succeed in making a kleptomaniac
think that he will not steal any more, he will cease to steal, etc., etc.

This training which perhaps seems to you an impossibility, is,
however, the simplest thing in the world. It is enough, by a series of
appropriate and graduated experiments, to teach the subject, as it
were the A. B. C. of conscious thought, and here is the series: by
following it to the letter one can be absolutely sure of obtaining a
good result, except with the two categories of persons mentioned
above.

_First experiment_.[*] _Preparatory_.--Ask the subject to stand
upright, with the body as stiff as an iron bar, the feet close together
from toe to heel, while keeping the ankles flexible as if they were
hinges. Tell him to make himself like a plank with hinges at its base,
which is balanced on the ground. Make him notice that if one pushes
the plank slightly either way it falls as a mass without any resistance,
in the direction in which it is pushed. Tell him that you are going to
pull him back by the shoulders and that he must let himself fall in
your arms without the slightest resistance, turning on his ankles as
on hinges, that is to say keeping the feet fixed to the ground. Then
pull him back by the shoulders and if the experiment does not
succeed, repeat it until it does, or nearly so.

[*] These experiments are those of Sage of Rochester.

_Second experiment_.--Begin by explaining to the subject that in
order to demonstrate the action of the imagination upon us, you are
going to ask him in a moment to think: "I am falling backwards, I
am falling backwards. . . ." Tell him that he must have no thought but
this in his mind, that he must not reflect or wonder if he is going to
fall or not, or think that if he falls he may hurt himself, etc., or fall
back purposely to please you, but that if he really feels something
impelling him to fall backwards, he must not resist but obey the
impulse.

Then ask your subject to raise the head high and to shut his eyes,
and place your right fist on the back of his neck, and your left hand
on his forehead, and say to him: "Now think: I am falling backwards,
I am falling backwards, etc., etc. . ." and, indeed, "You are falling
backwards, You . . . are . . . fall . . . ing . . . back . . . wards,
etc." At the same time slide the left hand lightly backwards to the
left temple, above the ear, and remove very slowly but with a
continuous movement the right fist.

The subject is immediately felt to make a slight movement
backwards, and either to stop himself from falling or else to fall
completely. In the first case, tell him that he has resisted, and that he
did not think just that he was falling, but that he might hurt himself
if he did fall. That is true, for if he had not thought the latter, he
would have fallen like a block. Repeat the experiment using a tone
of command as if you would force the subject to obey you. Go on
with it until it is completely successful or very nearly so. The
operator should stand a little behind the subject, the left leg forward
and the right leg well behind him, so as not to be knocked over by
the subject when he falls. Neglect of this precaution might result in a
double fall if the person is heavy.

_Third experiment_.--Place the subject facing you, the body still
stiff, the ankles flexible, and the feet joined and parallel. Put your
two hands on his temples without any pressure, look fixedly,
without moving the eyelids, at the root of his nose, and tell him to
think: "I am falling forward, I am falling forward . . ." and repeat to
him, stressing the syllables, "You are fall . . . ing . . . for . . . ward,
You are fall . . . ing . . . for . . . ward . . ." without ceasing to look
fixedly at him.

_Fourth experiment_.--Ask the subject to clasp his hands as tight as
possible, that is to say, until the fingers tremble slightly, look at him
in the same way as in the preceding experiment and keep your hands
on his as though to squeeze them together still more tightly. Tell him
to think that he cannot unclasp his fingers, that you are going to
count three, and that when you say "three" he is to try to separate his
hands while thinking all the time: "I cannot do it, I cannot do it . . ."
and he will find it impossible. Then count very slowly, "one, two,
three", and add immediately, detaching the syllables: "You . . .
can . . . not . . . do . . . it. . . . You . . . can . . . not . . .
do . . . it. . . ." If the subject is thinking properly, "I cannot do
it", not only is he unable to separate his fingers, but the latter
clasp themselves all the more tightly together the more efforts he makes
to separate them. He obtains in fact exactly the contrary to what he
wants. In a few moments say to him: "Now think: 'I can do it,'" and
his fingers will separate themselves.

Be careful always to keep your eyes fixed on the root of the subject's
nose, and do not allow him to turn his eyes away from yours for a
single moment. If he is able to unclasp his hands, do not think it is
your own fault, it is the subject's, he has not properly thought: "I
cannot". Assure him firmly of this, and begin the experiment again.

Always use a tone of command which suffers no disobedience. I do
not mean that it is necessary to raise your voice; on the contrary it is
preferable to employ the ordinary pitch, but stress every word in a
dry and imperative tone.

When these experiments have been successful, all the others succeed
equally well and can be easily obtained by carrying out to the letter
the instructions given above.

Some subjects are very sensitive, and it is easy to recognize them by
the fact that the contraction of their fingers and limbs is easily
produced. After two or three successful experiments, it is no longer
necessary to say to them: "Think this", or "think that"; You need
only, for example, say to them simply--but in the imperative tone
employed by all good suggestionists--"Close your hands; now you
cannot open them". "Shut your eyes; now you cannot open them,"
and the subject finds it absolutely impossible to open the hands or
the eyes in spite of all his efforts. Tell him in a few moments: "You
can do it now," and the de-contraction takes place instantaneously.

These experiments can be varied to infinity. Here are a few more:
Make the subject join his hands, and suggest that they are welded
together; make him put his hand on the table, and suggest that it is
stuck to it; tell him that he is fixed to his chair and cannot rise; make
him rise, and tell him he cannot walk; put a penholder on the table
and tell him that it weighs a hundredweight, and that he cannot lift it,
etc., etc.

In all these experiments, I cannot repeat too often, it is not
_suggestion_ properly so-called which produces the phenomena, but
the _autosuggestion_ which is consecutive to the suggestion of the
operator.


METHOD OF PROCEDURE IN CURATIVE SUGGESTION

When the subject has passed through the preceding experiments and
has understood them, he is ripe for curative suggestion. He is like a
cultivated field in which the seed can germinate and develop,
whereas before it was but rough earth in which it would have
perished.

Whatever ailment the subject suffers from, whether it is physical or
mental, it is important to proceed always in the same way, and to use
the same words with a few variations according to the case.

Say to the subject: Sit down and close your eyes. I am not going to
try and put you to sleep as it is quite unnecessary. I ask you to close
your eyes simply in order that your attention may not be distracted
by the objects around you. Now tell yourself that every word I say is
going to fix itself in your mind, and be printed, engraved, and
encrusted in it, that, there, it is going to stay fixed, imprinted, and
encrusted, and that without your will or knowledge, in fact perfectly
unconsciously on your part, you yourself and your whole organism
are going to obey. In the first place I say that every day, three times
a day, in the morning, at midday, and in the evening, at the usual
meal times, you will feel hungry, that is to say, you will experience
the agreeable sensation which makes you think and say: "Oh! how
nice it will be to have something to eat!" You will then eat and enjoy
your food, without of course overeating. You will also be careful to
masticate it properly so as to transform it into a sort of soft paste
before swallowing it. In these conditions you will digest it properly,
and so feel no discomfort, inconvenience, or pain of any kind either
in the stomach or intestines. You will assimilate what you eat and
your organism will make use of it to make blood, muscle, strength
and energy, in a word: Life.

Since you will have digested your food properly, the function of
excretion will be normal, and every morning, on rising, you will feel
the need of evacuating the bowels, and without ever being obliged to
take medicine or to use any artifice, you will obtain a normal and
satisfactory result.

Further, every night from the time you wish to go to sleep till the
time you wish to wake next morning, you will sleep deeply, calmly,
and quietly, without nightmares, and on waking you will feel
perfectly well, cheerful, and active.

Likewise, if you occasionally suffer from depression, if you are
gloomy and prone to worry and look on the dark side of things, from
now onwards you will cease to do so, and, instead of worrying and
being depressed and looking on the dark side of things, you are
going to feel perfectly cheerful, possibly without any special reason
for it, just as you used to feel depressed for no particular reason. I
say further still, that even if you have real reason to be worried and
depressed you are not going to be so.

If you are also subject to occasional fits of impatience or ill-temper
you will cease to have them: on the contrary you will be always
patient and master of yourself, and the things which worried,
annoyed, or irritated you, will henceforth leave you absolutely
indifferent and perfectly calm.

If you are sometimes attacked, pursued, haunted, by bad and
unwholesome ideas, by apprehensions, fears, aversions, temptations,
or grudges against other people, all that will be gradually lost sight
of by your imagination, and will melt away and lose itself as though
in a distant cloud where it will finally disappear completely. As a
dream vanishes when we wake, so will all these vain images
disappear.

To this I add that all your organs are performing their functions
properly. The heart beats in a normal way and the circulation of the
blood takes place as it should; the lungs are carrying out their
functions, as also the stomach, the intestines, the liver, the biliary
duct, the kidneys and the bladder. If at the present moment any of
them is acting abnormally, that abnormality is becoming less every
day, so that quite soon it will have vanished completely, and the
organ will have recovered its normal function. Further, if there
should be any lesions in any of these organs, they will get better
from day to day and will soon be entirely healed. (With regard to
this, I may say that it is not necessary to know which organ is
affected for it to be cured. Under the influence of the autosuggestion
"Every day, in every respect, I am getting better and better", the
unconscious acts upon the organ which it can pick out itself.)

I must also add--and it is extremely important--that if up to the
present you have lacked confidence in yourself, I tell you that this
self-distrust will disappear little by little and give place to
self-confidence, based on the knowledge of this force of incalculable
power which is in each one of us. It is absolutely necessary for every
human being to have this confidence. Without it one can accomplish
nothing, with it one can accomplish whatever one likes, (within
reason, of course). You are then going to have confidence in
yourself, and this confidence gives you the assurance that you are
capable of accomplishing perfectly well whatever you wish to do,
--_on condition that it is reasonable_,--and whatever it is your duty to
do.

So when you wish to do something reasonable, or when you have a
duty to perform, always think that it is _easy_, and make the words
_difficult, impossible, I cannot, it is stronger than I, I cannot prevent
myself from_. . . , disappear from your vocabulary; they are not
English. What is English is: "_It is easy and I can_ ". By considering
the thing easy it becomes so for you, although it might seem difficult
to others. You will do it quickly and well, and without fatigue,
because you do it without effort, whereas if you had considered it as
difficult or impossible it would have become so for you, simply
because you would have thought it so.

To these general suggestions which will perhaps seem long and even
childish to some of you, but which are necessary, must be added
those which apply to the particular case of the patient you are
dealing with.

All these suggestions must be made in a monotonous and soothing
voice (always emphasizing the essential words), which although it
does not actually send the subject to sleep, at least makes him feel
drowsy, and think of nothing in particular.

When you have come to the end of the series of suggestions you
address the subject in these terms: "In short, I mean that from every
point of view, physical as well as mental, you are going to enjoy
excellent health, better health than that you have been able to enjoy
up to the present. Now I am going to count three, and when I say
'Three', you will open your eyes and come out of the passive state
in which you are now. You will come out of it quite naturally,
without feeling in the least drowsy or tired, on the contrary, you will
feel strong, vigorous, alert, active, full of life; further still, you will
feel very cheerful and fit in every way. 'ONE--TWO--THREE--' At
the word 'three' the subject opens his eyes, always with a smile and
an expression of well-being and contentment on his face."

Sometimes,--though rarely,--the patient is cured on the spot; at other
times, and this is more generally the case, he finds himself relieved,
his pain or his depression has partially or totally disappeared, though
only for a certain lapse of time.

In every case it is necessary to renew the suggestions more or less
frequently according to your subject, being careful always to space
them out at longer and longer intervals, according to the progress
obtained until they are no longer necessary,--that is to say when the
cure is complete.

Before sending away your patient, you must tell him that he carries
within him the instrument by which he can cure himself, and that
you are, as it were, only a professor teaching him to use this
instrument, and that he must help you in your task. Thus, every
morning before rising, and every night on getting into bed, he must
shut his eyes and in thought transport himself into your presence,
and then repeat twenty times consecutively in a monotonous voice,
counting by means of a string with twenty knots in it, this little
phrase:

"EVERY DAY, IN EVERY RESPECT, I AM GETTING BETTER
AND BETTER." In his mind he should emphasize the words "_in
every respect_" which applies to every need, mental or physical.
This general suggestion is more efficacious than special ones.

Thus it is easy to realize the part played by the giver of the
suggestions. He is not a master who gives orders, but a friend, a
guide, who leads the patient step by step on the road to health. As all
the suggestions are given in the interest of the patient, the
unconscious of the latter asks nothing better than to assimilate them
and transform them into autosuggestions. When this has been done,
the cure is obtained more or less rapidly according to circumstances.


THE SUPERIORITY OF THIS METHOD

This method gives absolutely marvelous results, and it is easy to
understand why. Indeed, by following out my advice, it is
impossible to fail, except with the two classes of persons mentioned
above, who fortunately represent barely 3 per cent of the whole. If,
however, you try to put your subjects to sleep right away, without
the explanations and preliminary experiments necessary to bring
them to accept the suggestions and to transform them into
autosuggestions you cannot and will not succeed except with
peculiarly sensitive subjects, and these are rare. Everybody may
become so by training, but very few are so sufficiently without the
preliminary instruction that I recommend, which can be done in a
few minutes.

Formerly, imagining that suggestions could only be given during
sleep, I always tried to put my patient to sleep; but on discovering
that it was not indispensable, I left off doing it in order to spare him
the dread and uneasiness he almost always experiences when he is
told that he is going to be sent to sleep, and which often makes him
offer, in spite of himself, an involuntary resistance. If, on the
contrary, you tell him that you are not going to put him to sleep as
there is no need to do so, you gain his confidence. He listens to you
without fear or any ulterior thought, and it often happens--if not the
first time, anyhow very soon--that, soothed by the monotonous
sound of your voice, he falls into a deep sleep from which he
awakes astonished at having slept at all.

If there are sceptics among you--as I am quite sure there are--all I
have to say to them is: "Come to my house and see what is being
done, and you will be convinced by fact."

You must not however run away with the idea that autosuggestion
can only be brought about in the way I have described. It is possible
to make suggestions to people without their knowledge and without
any preparation. For instance, if a doctor who by his title alone has a
suggestive influence on his patient, tells him that he can do nothing
for him, and that his illness is incurable, he provokes in the mind of
the latter an autosuggestion which may have the most disastrous
consequences; if however he tells him that his illness is a serious
one, it is true, but that with care, time, and patience, he can be cured,
he sometimes and even often obtains results which will surprise him.

Here is another example: if a doctor after examining his patient,
writes a prescription and gives it to him without any comment, the
remedies prescribed will not have much chance of succeeding; if, on
the other hand, he explains to his patient that such and such
medicines must be taken in such and such conditions and that they
will produce certain results, those results are practically certain to be
brought about.

If in this hall there are medical men or brother chemists, I hope they
will not think me their enemy. I am on the contrary their best friend.
On the one hand I should like to see the theoretical and practical
study of suggestion on the syllabus of the medical schools for the
great benefit of the sick and of the doctors themselves; and on the
other hand, in my opinion, every time that a patient goes to see his
doctor, the latter should order him one or even several medicines,
even if they are not necessary. As a matter of fact, when a patient
visits his doctor, it is in order to be told what medicine will cure him.
He does not realize that it is the hygiene and regimen which do this,
and he attaches little importance to them. It is a medicine that he
wants.

In my opinion, if the doctor only prescribes a regimen without any
medicine, his patient will be dissatisfied; he will say that he took the
trouble to consult him for nothing, and often goes to another doctor.
It seems to me then that the doctor should always prescribe
medicines to his patient, and, as much as possible, medicines made
up by himself rather than the standard remedies so much advertised
and which owe their only value to the advertisement. The doctor's
own prescriptions will inspire infinitely more confidence than So
and So's pills which anyone can procure easily at the nearest drug
store without any need of a prescription.


HOW SUGGESTION WORKS

In order to understand properly the part played by suggestion or
rather by autosuggestion, it is enough to know that the _unconscious
self is the grand director of all our functions_. Make this believed,
as I said above, that a certain organ which does not function well
must perform its function, and instantly the order is transmitted. The
organ obeys with docility, and either at once or little by little
performs its functions in a normal manner. This explains simply and
clearly how by means of suggestion one can stop haemorrhages,
cure constipation, cause fibrous tumours to disappear, cure paralysis,
tubercular lesions, varicose, ulcers, etc.

Let us take for example, a case of dental haemorrhage which I had
the opportunity of observing in the consulting room of M. Gauthe, a
dentist at Troyes. A young lady whom I had helped to cure herself
of asthma from which she had suffered for eight years, told me one
day that she wanted to have a tooth out. As I knew her to be very
sensitive, I offered to make her feel nothing of the operation. She
naturally accepted with pleasure and we made an appointment with
the dentist. On the day we had arranged we presented ourselves at
the dentist's and, standing opposite my patient, I looked fixedly at
her, saying: "You feel nothing, you feel nothing, etc., etc." and then
while still continuing the suggestion I made a sign to the dentist. In
an instant the tooth was out without Mlle. D---- turning a hair. As
fairly often happens, a haemorrhage followed, but I told the dentist
that I would try suggestion without his using a haemostatic, without
knowing beforehand what would happen. I then asked Mlle. D---- to
look at me fixedly, and I suggested to her that in two minutes the
haemorrhage would cease of its own accord, and we waited. The
patient spat blood again once or twice, and then ceased. I told her to
open her mouth, and we both looked and found that a clot of blood
had formed in the dental cavity.

How is this phenomenon to be explained? In the simplest way.
Under the influence of the idea: "The haemorrhage is to stop", the
unconscious had sent to the small arteries and veins the order to stop
the flow of blood, and, obediently, they contracted _naturally_, as
they would have done artificially at the contact of a haemostatic like
adrenalin, for example.

The same reasoning explains how a fibrous tumour can be made to
disappear. The unconscious having accepted the idea "It is to go" the
brain orders the arteries which nourish it, to contract. They do so,
refusing their services, and ceasing to nourish the tumour which,
deprived of nourishment, dies, dries up, is reabsorbed and
disappears.


THE USE OF SUGGESTION FOR THE CURE OF MORAL
AILMENTS AND TAINTS EITHER CONGENITAL OR
ACQUIRED

Neurasthenia, so common nowadays, generally yields to suggestion
constantly practised in the way I have indicated. I have had the
happiness of contributing to the cure of a large number of
neurasthenics with whom every other treatment had failed. One of
them had even spent a month in a special establishment at
Luxemburg without obtaining any improvement. In six weeks he
was completely cured, and he is now the happiest man one would
wish to find, after having thought himself the most miserable.
Neither is he ever likely to fall ill again in the same way, for I
showed him how to make use of conscious autosuggestion and he
does it marvelously well.

But if suggestion is useful in treating moral complaints and physical
ailments, may it not render still greater services to society, in
turning into honest folks the wretched children who people our
reformatories and who only leave them to enter the army of crime.
Let no one tell me it is impossible. The remedy exists and I can
prove it.

I will quote the two following cases which are very characteristic,
but here I must insert a few remarks in parenthesis. To make you
understand the way in which suggestion acts in the treatment of
moral taints I will use the following comparison. Suppose our brain
is a plank in which are driven nails which represent the ideas, habits,
and instincts, which determine our actions. If we find that there
exists in a subject a bad idea, a bad habit, a bad instinct,--as it were,
a bad nail, we take another which is the good idea, habit, or instinct,
place it on top of the bad one and give a tap with a hammer--in other
words we make a suggestion. The new nail will be driven in perhaps
a fraction of an inch, while the old one will come out to the same
extent. At each fresh blow with the hammer, that is to say at each
fresh suggestion, the one will be driven in a fraction further and the
other will be driven out the same amount, until, after a certain
number of blows, the old nail will come out completely and be
replaced by the new one. When this substitution has been made, the
individual obeys it.

Let us return to our examples. Little M----, a child of eleven living at
Troyes, was subject night and day to certain accidents inherent to
early infancy. He was also a kleptomaniac, and, of course, untruthful
into the bargain. At his mother's request I treated him by suggestion.
After the first visit the accidents ceased by day, but continued at
night. Little by little they became less frequent, and finally, a few
months afterwards, the child was completely cured. In the same
period his thieving propensities lessened, and in six months they had
entirely ceased.

This child's brother, aged eighteen, had conceived a violent hatred
against another of his brothers. Every time that he had taken a little
too much wine, he felt impelled to draw a knife and stab his brother.
He felt that one day or other he would end by doing so, and he knew
at the same time that having done so he would be inconsolable. I
treated him also by suggestion, and the result was marvelous. After
the first treatment he was cured. His hatred for his brother had
disappeared, and they have since become good friends and got on
capitally together. I followed up the case for a long time, and the
cure was permanent.

Since such results are to be obtained by suggestion, would it not be
beneficial--I might even say _indispensable_--to take up this
method and introduce it into our reformatories? I am absolutely
convinced that if suggestion were daily applied to vicious children,
more than 50 per cent could be reclaimed. Would it not be an
immense service to render society, to bring back to it sane and well
members of it who were formerly corroded by moral decay?

Perhaps I shall be told that suggestion is a dangerous thing, and that
it can be used for evil purposes. This is no valid objection, first
because the practice of suggestion would only be confided [by the
patient] to reliable and honest people,--to the reformatory doctors,
for instance,--and on the other hand, those who seek to use it for evil
ask no one's permission.

But even admitting that it offers some danger (which is not so) I
should like to ask whoever proffers the objection, to tell me what
thing we use that is not dangerous? Is it steam? gunpowder?
railways? ships? electricity? automobiles? aeroplanes? Are the
poisons not dangerous which we, doctors and chemists, use daily in
minute doses, and which might easily destroy the patient if, in a
moment's carelessness, we unfortunately made a mistake in
weighing them out?


A FEW TYPICAL CURES

This little work would be incomplete if it did not include a few
examples of the cures obtained. It would take too long, and would
also perhaps be somewhat tiring if I were to relate all those in which
I have taken part. I will therefore content myself by quoting a few of
the most remarkable.

Mlle. M---- D----, of Troyes, had suffered for eight years from
asthma which obliged her to sit up in bed nearly all night, fighting
for breath. Preliminary experiments show that she is a very sensitive
subject. She sleeps immediately, and the suggestion is given. From
the first treatment there is an enormous improvement. The patient
has a good night, only interrupted by one attack of asthma which
only lasts a quarter of an hour. In a very short time the asthma
disappears completely and there is no relapse later on.

M. M----, a working hosier living at Sainte-Savine near Troyes,
paralyzed for two years as the result of injuries at the junction of the
spinal column and the pelvis. The paralysis is only in the lower
limbs, in which the circulation of the blood has practically ceased,
making them swollen, congested, and discolored. Several treatments,
including the antisyphilitic, have been tried without success.
Preliminary experiments successful; suggestion applied by me, and
autosuggestion by the patient for eight days. At the end of this time
there is an almost imperceptible but still appreciable movement of
the left leg. Renewed suggestion. In eight days the improvement is
noticeable. Every week or fortnight there is an increased
improvement with progressive lessening of the swelling, and so on.
Eleven months afterwards, on the first of November, 1906, the
patient goes downstairs alone and walks 800 yards, and in the month
of July, 1907, goes back to the factory where he has continued to
work since that time, with no trace of paralysis.

M. A---- G----, living at Troyes, has long suffered from enteritis, for
which different treatments have been tried in vain. He is also in a
very bad state mentally, being depressed, gloomy, unsociable, and
obsessed by thoughts of suicide. Preliminary experiments easy,
followed by suggestion which produces an appreciable result from
the very day. For three months, daily suggestions to begin with, then
at increasingly longer intervals. At the end of this time, the cure is
complete, the enteritis has disappeared, and his _morals_ have
become excellent. As the cure dates back twelve years without the
shadow of a relapse, it may be considered as permanent. M. G----, is
a striking example of the effects that can be produced by suggestion,
or rather by autosuggestion. At the same time as I made suggestions
to him from the physical point of view, I also did so from the mental,
and he accepted both suggestions equally well. Every day his
confidence in himself increased, and as he was an excellent
workman, in order to earn more, he looked out for a machine which
would enable him to work at home for his employer. A little later a
factory owner having seen with his own eyes what a good workman
he was, entrusted him with the very machine he desired. Thanks to
his skill he was able to turn out much more than an ordinary
workman, and his employer, delighted with the result, gave him
another and yet another machine, until M. G----, who, but for
suggestion, would have remained an ordinary workman, is now in
charge of six machines which bring him a very hand some profit.

Mme. D----, at Troyes, about 30 years of age. She is in the last
stages of consumption, and grows thinner daily in spite of special
nourishment. She suffers from coughing and spitting, and has
difficulty in breathing; in fact, from all appearances she has
only a few months to live. Preliminary experiments show
great sensitiveness, and suggestion is followed by immediate
improvement. From the next day the morbid symptoms begin to
lessen. Every day the improvement becomes more marked, the
patient rapidly puts on flesh, although she no longer takes special
nourishment. In a few months the cure is apparently complete. This
person wrote to me on the 1st of January, 1911, that is to say eight
months after I had left Troyes, to thank me and to tell me that,
although pregnant, she was perfectly well.

I have purposely chosen these cases dating some time back, in order
to show that the cures are permanent, but I should like to add a few
more recent ones.

M. X----, Post Office clerk at Luneville. Having lost one of his
children in January, 1910, the trouble produces in him a cerebral
disturbance which manifests itself by uncontrollable nervous
trembling. His uncle brings him to me in the month of June.
Preliminary experiments followed by suggestion. Four days
afterwards the patient returns to tell me that the trembling has
disappeared. I renew the suggestion and tell him to return in eight
days. A week, then a fortnight, then three weeks, then a month, pass
by without my hearing any more of him. Shortly afterwards his
uncle comes and tells me that he has just had a letter from his
nephew, who is perfectly well. He has taken on again his work as
telegraphist which he had been obliged to give up, and the day
before, he had sent off a telegram of 170 words without the least
difficulty. He could easily, he added in his letter, have sent off an
even longer one. Since then he has had no relapse.

M. Y----, of Nancy, has suffered from neurasthenia for several years.
He has aversions, nervous fears, and disorders of the stomach and
intestines. He sleeps badly, is gloomy and is haunted by ideas of
suicide; he staggers when he walks like a drunken man, and can
think of nothing but his trouble. All treatments have failed and he
gets worse and worse; a stay in a special nursing home for such
cases has no effect whatever. M. Y---- comes to see me at the
beginning of October, 1910. Preliminary experiments comparatively
easy. I explain to the patient the principles of autosuggestion, and
the existence within us of the conscious and the unconscious self,
and then make the required suggestion. For two or three days
M. Y---- has a little difficulty with the explanations I have given him.
In a short time light breaks in upon his mind, and he grasps the whole
thing. I renew the suggestion, and he makes it himself too every day.
The improvement, which is at first slow, becomes more and more
rapid, and in a month and a half the cure is complete. The ex-invalid
who had lately considered himself the most wretched of men, now
thinks himself the happiest.

M. E----, of Troyes. An attack of gout; the right ankle is inflamed
and painful, and he is unable to walk. The preliminary experiments
show him to be a very sensitive subject. After the first treatment he
is able to regain, without the help of his stick, the carriage which
brought him, and the pain has ceased. The next day he does not
return as I had told him to do. Afterwards his wife comes alone and
tells me that that morning her husband had got up, put on his shoes,
and gone off on his bicycle to visit his yards (he is a painter). It is
needless to tell you my utter astonishment. I was not able to follow
up this case, as the patient never deigned to come and see me again,
but some time afterward I heard that he had had no relapse.

Mme. T----, of Nancy. Neurasthenia, dyspepsia, gastralgia, enteritis,
and pains in different parts of the body. She has treated herself for
several years with a negative result. I treat her by suggestion, and
she makes autosuggestions for herself every day. From the first day
there is a noticeable improvement which continues without
interruption. At the present moment this person has long been cured
mentally and physically, and follows no regimen. She thinks that she
still has perhaps a slight touch of enteritis, but she is not sure.

Mme. X----, a sister of Mme. T----. Acute neurasthenia; she stays in
bed a fortnight every month, as it is totally impossible for her to
move or work; she suffers from lack of appetite, depression, and
digestive disorders. She is cured by one visit, and the cure seems to
be permanent as she has had no relapse.

Mme. H----, at Maxeville. General eczema, which is particularly
severe on the left leg. Both legs are inflamed, above all at the ankles;
walking is difficult and painful. I treat her by suggestion. That same
evening Mme. H---- is able to walk several hundred yards without
fatigue. The day after the feet and ankles are no longer swollen and
have not been swollen again since. The eczema disappears rapidly.

Mme. F----, at Laneuveville. Pains in the kidneys and the knees. The
illness dates from ten years back and is becoming worse every day.
Suggestion from me, and autosuggestion from herself. The
improvement is immediate and increases progressively. The cure is
obtained rapidly, and is a permanent one.

Mme. Z----, of Nancy, felt ill in January, 1910, with congestion of
the lungs, from which she had not recovered two months later. She
suffers from general weakness, loss of appetite, bad digestive
trouble, rare and difficult bowel action, insomnia, copious
night-sweats. After the first suggestion, the patient feels much better,
and two days later she returns and tells me that she feels quite well.
Every trace of illness has disappeared, and all the organs are
functioning normally. Three or four times she had been on the point
of sweating, but each time prevented it by the use of conscious
autosuggestion. From this time Mme. Z---- has enjoyed perfectly
good health.

M. X----, at Belfort, cannot talk for more than ten minutes or a
quarter of an hour without becoming completely aphonous.
Different doctors consulted find no lesion in the vocal organs, but
one of them says that M. X---- suffers from senility of the larynx,
and this conclusion confirms him in the belief that he is incurable.
He comes to spend his holidays at Nancy, and a lady of my
acquaintance advises him to come and see me. He refuses at first,
but eventually consents in spite of his absolute disbelief in the
effects of suggestion. I treat him in this way nevertheless, and ask
him to return two days afterwards. He comes back on the appointed
day, and tells me that the day before he was able to converse the
whole afternoon without becoming aphonous. Two days later he
returns again to say that his trouble had not reappeared, although he
had not only conversed a great deal but even sung the day before.
The cure still holds good and I am convinced that it will always do
so.

Before closing, I should like to say a few words on the application
of my method to the training and correction of children by their
parents.

The latter should wait until the child is asleep, and then one of them
should enter his room with precaution, stop a yard from his bed, and
repeat 15 or 20 times in a murmur all the things they wish to obtain
from the child, from the point of view of health, work, sleep,
application, conduct, etc. He should then retire as he came, taking
great care not to awake the child. This extremely simple process
gives the best possible results, and it is easy to understand why.
When the child is asleep his body and his conscious self are at rest
and, as it were, annihilated; his unconscious self however is awake;
it is then to the latter alone that one speaks, and as it is very
credulous it accepts what one says to it without dispute, so that, little
by little, the child arrives at making of himself what his parents
desire him to be.


CONCLUSION

What conclusion is to be drawn from all this?

The conclusion is very simple and can be expressed in a few words:
We possess within us a force of incalculable power, which, when we
handle it unconsciously is often prejudicial to us. If on the contrary
we direct it in a conscious and wise manner, it gives us the mastery
of ourselves and allows us not only to escape and to aid others to
escape, from physical and mental ills, but also to live in relative
happiness, whatever the conditions in which we may find ourselves.

Lastly, and above all, it should be applied to the moral regeneration
of those who have wandered from the right path.




THOUGHTS AND PRECEPTS OF EMILE COUE

_taken down literally by Mme. Emile Leon, his disciple._

Do not spend your time in thinking of illness you might have, for if
you have no real ones you will create artificial ones.

***

When you make conscious autosuggestions, do it naturally, simply,
with conviction, and above all _without any effort._ If unconscious
and bad autosuggestions are so often realized, it is because they are
made without effort.

***

Be sure that you will obtain what you want, and you will obtain it,
so long as it is within reason.

***

To become master of oneself it is enough to think that one is
becoming so. . . . Your hands tremble, your steps falter, tell yourself
that all that is going to cease, and little by little it will disappear.
It is not in me but in yourself that you must have confidence, for it
is in yourself alone that dwells the force which can cure you. My part
simply consists in teaching you to make use of that force.

***

Never discuss things you know nothing about, or you will only
make yourself ridiculous.

Things which seem miraculous to you have a perfectly natural cause;
if they seem extraordinary it is only because the cause escapes you.
When you know that, you realize that nothing could be more natural.

***

When the will and the imagination are in conflict, it is always the
imagination which wins. Such a case is only too frequent, and then
not only do we not do what we want, but just the contrary of what
we want. For example: the more we try to go to sleep, the more we
try to remember the name of some one, the more we try to stop
laughing, the more we try to avoid an obstacle, while _thinking that
we cannot do so,_ the more excited we become, the less we can
remember the name, the more uncontrollable our laughter becomes,
and the more surely we rush upon the obstacle.

It is then the imagination and not the will which is the most
important faculty of man; and thus it is a serious mistake to advise
people to train their wills, it is the training of their imaginations
which they ought to set about.

***

Things are not for us what they are, but what they seem; this
explains the contradictory evidence of persons speaking in all good
faith.

***

By believing oneself to be the master of one's thoughts one becomes
so.

***

Everyone of our thoughts, good or bad, becomes concrete,
materializes, and becomes in short a reality.

We are what we make ourselves and not what circumstances make
us.

***

Whoever starts off in life with the idea: "I shall succeed", always
does succeed because he does what is necessary to bring about this
result. If only one opportunity presents itself to him, and if this
opportunity has, as it were, only one hair on its head, he seizes it by
that one hair. Further, he often brings about unconsciously or not,
propitious circumstances.

He who on the contrary always doubts himself, never succeeds in
doing anything. He might find himself in the midst of an army of
opportunities with heads of hair like Absalom, and yet he would not
see them and could not seize a single one, even if he had only to
stretch out his hand in order to do so. And if he brings about
circumstances, they are generally unfavorable ones. Do not then
blame fate, you have only yourself to blame.

***

People are always preaching the doctrine of effort, but this idea must
be repudiated. Effort means will, and will means the possible
entrance of the imagination in opposition, and the bringing about of
the exactly contrary result to the desired one.

***

Always think that what you have to do is easy, if possible. In this
state of mind you will not spend more of your strength than just
what is necessary; if you consider it difficult, you will spend ten,
twenty times more strength than you need; in other words you will
waste it.

***

Autosuggestion is an instrument which you have to learn how to use
just as you would for any other instrument. An excellent gun in
inexperienced hands only gives wretched results, but the more
skilled the same hands become, the more easily they place the
bullets in the target.

***

Conscious autosuggestion, made with confidence, with faith, with
perseverance, realizes itself mathematically, within reason.

***

When certain people do not obtain satisfactory results with
autosuggestion, it is either because they lack confidence, or because
they make efforts, which is the more frequent case. To make good
suggestions it is absolutely necessary to do it _without effort._ The
latter implies the use of the _will,_ which must be entirely put aside.
One must have recourse _exclusively_ to the imagination.

***

Many people who have taken care of their health all their life in vain,
imagine that they can be immediately cured by autosuggestion. It is
a mistake, for it is not reasonable to think so. It is no use expecting
from suggestion more than it can normally produce, that is to say, a
progressive improvement which little by little transforms itself into a
complete cure, when that is possible.

***

The means employed by the healers all go back to autosuggestion,
that is to say that these methods, whatever they are, words,
incantations, gestures, staging, all produce in the patient the
autosuggestion of recovery.

Every illness has two aspects unless it is exclusively a mental one.
Indeed, on every physical illness a mental one comes and attaches
itself. If we give to the physical illness the coefficient 1, the mental
illness may have the coefficient 1, 2, 10, 20, 50, 100, and more. In
many cases this can disappear instantaneously, and if its coefficient
is a very high one, 100 for instance, while that of the physical
ailment is 1, only this latter is left, a 101st of the total illness;
such a thing is called a miracle, and yet there is nothing miraculous
about it.

***

Contrary to common opinion, physical diseases are generally far
more easily cured than mental ones.

Buffon used to say: "Style is the man." We would put in that: "Man
is what he thinks". The fear of failure is almost certain to cause
failure, in the same way as the idea of success brings success, and
enables one always to surmount the obstacles that may be met with.

***

Conviction is as necessary to the suggester as to his subject. It is this
conviction, this faith, which enables him to obtain results where all
other means have failed.

***

It is not the person who acts, it is the method.

***

. . . Contrary to general opinion, suggestion, or autosuggestion can
bring about the cure of organic lesions.

Formerly it was believed that hypnotism could only be applied to the
treatment of nervous illnesses; its domain is far greater than that. It
is true that hypnotism acts through the intermediary of the nervous
system; but the nervous system dominates the whole organism. The
muscles are set in movement by the nerves; the nerves regulate the
circulation by their direct action on the heart, and by their action on
the blood vessels which they dilate or contract. The nerves act then
on all the organs, and by their intermediation all the unhealthy
organs may be affected.

Docteur Paul Joire, _President of the Societe universelle d'Etudes
psychiques_ (Bull. No. 4 of the S. L. P.)

***

. . . Moral influence has a considerable value as a help in healing. It
is a factor of the first order which it would be very wrong to neglect,
since in medicine as in every branch of human activity it is the
_spiritual forces_ which lead the world.

Docteur Louis Renon, _Lecturing professor at the Faculty of
Medicine of Paris, and doctor at the Necker Hospital._

***

. . . Never lose sight of the great principle of autosuggestion:
_Optimism always and in spite of everything, even when events do
not seem to justify it._

Rene de Drabois, (Bull. 11 of the S. L. P. A.)

***

Suggestion sustained by faith is a formidable force.

Docteur A. L., Paris, (July, 1920.)

To have and to inspire unalterable confidence, one must walk with
the assurance of perfect sincerity, and in order to possess this
assurance and sincerity, one must wish for _the good of others_
more than one's own.

"Culture de la Force Morale", by C. Baudouin.



OBSERVATIONS ON WHAT AUTOSUGGESTION CAN DO

Young B----, 13 years old, enters the hospital in January 1912. He
has a very serious heart complaint characterized by a peculiarity in
the respiration; he has such difficulty in breathing that he can only
take very slow and short steps. The doctor who attends him, one of
our best practitioners, predicts a rapid and fatal issue. The invalid
leaves the hospital in February, _no better._ A friend of his family
brings him to me and when I see him I regard him as a hopeless case,
but nevertheless I make him pass through the preliminary
experiments which are marvelously successful. After having made
him a suggestion and advised him to do the same thing for himself, I
tell him to come back in two days. When he does so I notice to my
astonishment a _remarkable_ improvement in his respiration and his
walking. I renew the suggestion and two days afterwards, when he
returns the improvement has continued, and so it is at every visit. So
rapid is the progress that he makes that, three weeks after the first
visit, my little patient is able to go _on foot_ with his mother to the
plateau of Villers. He can breathe with ease and almost normally, he
can walk without getting out of breath, and can mount the stairs,
which was impossible for him before. As the improvement is
steadily maintained, little B---- asks me if he can go and stay with
his grandmother at Carignan. As he seems well I advise him to do so,
and he goes off, but sends me news of himself from time to time.
His health is becoming better and better, he has a good appetite,
digests and assimilates his food well, and the feeling of oppression
has entirely disappeared. Not only can he walk like everybody else,
but he even runs and chases butterflies.

He returns in October, and I can hardly recognize him, for the bent
and puny little fellow who had left me in May has become a tall
upright boy, whose face beams with health. He has grown 12
centimeters and gained 19 lbs. in weight. Since then he has lived a
perfectly normal life; he runs up and down stairs, rides a bicycle,
and plays football with his comrades.

Mlle. X----, of Geneva, aged 13. Sore on the temple considered by
several doctors as being of tubercular origin; for a year and a half it
has refused to yield to the different treatments ordered. She is taken
to M. Baudouin, a follower of M. Coue at Geneva, who treats her by
suggestion and tells her to return in a week. When she comes back
the sore has healed.

Mlle. Z----, also of Geneva. Has had the right leg drawn up for 17
years, owing to an abscess above the knee which had had to be
operated upon. She asks M. Baudouin to treat her by suggestion, and
hardly has he begun when the leg can be bent and unbent in a
normal manner. (There was of course a psychological cause in this
case.)

Mme. Urbain Marie, aged 55, at Maxeville. Varicose nicer, dating
from more than a year and a half. First visit in September, 1915, and
a second one a week later. In a fortnight the cure is complete.

Emile Chenu, 10 years old, Grande-Rue, 19 (a refugee from Metz).
Some unknown heart complaint with vegetations. Every night loses
blood by the mouth. Comes first in July, 1915, and after a few visits
the loss of blood diminishes, and continues to do so until by the end
of November it has ceased completely. The vegetations also seem to
be no longer there, and by August, 1916, there had been no relapse.

M. Hazot, aged 48, living at Brin. Invalided the 15th of January,
1915, with _specific_ chronic bronchitis, which is getting worse
every day. He comes in to me in October, 1915. The improvement is
immediate, and has been maintained since. At the present moment,
although he is not completely cured, he is very much better.

M. B----, has suffered for 24 years from frontal sinus, which had
necessitated eleven operations!! In spite of all that had been done the
sinus persisted, accompanied by intolerable pains. The physical state
of the patient was pitiable in the extreme; he had violent and almost
continuous pain, extreme weakness; lack of appetite, could neither
walk, read nor sleep, etc. His nerves were in nearly as bad a state as
his body, and in spite of the treatment of such men as Bernheim of
Nancy, Dejerine of Paris, Dubois of Bern, X---- of Strasburg, his ill
health not only continued but even grew worse every day. The
patient comes to me in September, 1915, on the advice of one of my
other patients. From that moment he made rapid progress and at the
present time (1921) he is perfectly well. It is a real resurrection.

M. Nagengast, aged 18, rue Sellier, 39. Suffering from Pott's disease.
Comes to me in the beginning of 1914, having been encased for six
months in a plaster corset. Comes regularly twice a week to the
"seances," and makes for himself the usual suggestion morning and
evening. Improvement soon shows itself, and in a short time the
patient is able to do without his plaster casing. I saw him again in
April, 1916. He was completely cured, and was carrying on his
duties as postman, after having been assistant to an ambulance at
Nancy, where he had stayed until it was done away with.

M. D----, at Jarville. Paralysis of the left upper eyelid. Goes to the
hospital where he receives injections, as a result of which the eyelid
is raised. The left eye was, however, deflected outwards for more
than 45 degrees, and an operation seemed to be necessary. It was at
this moment that he came to me, and thanks to autosuggestion the
eye went back little by little to its normal position.

Mme. L----, of Nancy. Continuous pain in the right side of the face,
which had gone on for 10 years. She has consulted many doctors
whose prescriptions seemed of no use, and an operation is judged to
be necessary. The patient comes to me on the 25th of July, 1916,
and there is an immediate improvement. In about ten days' time the
pain has entirely vanished, and up to the 20th of December, there
had been no recurrence.

T---- Maurice, aged 8 and a half, at Nancy: club feet. A first
operation cures, or nearly so, the left foot, while the right one still
remains crippled. Two subsequent operations do no good. The child
is brought to me for the first time in February, 1915; he walks pretty
well, thanks to two contrivances which hold his feet straight. The
first visit is followed by an immediate improvement, and after the
second, the child is able to walk in ordinary boots.  The
improvement becomes more and more marked, by the 17th of April
the child is quite well. The right foot, however, is not now quite so
strong as it was, owing to a sprain which he gave it in February,
1916.

Mlle X----, at Blainville. A sore on the left foot, probably of specific
origin. A slight sprain has brought about a swelling of the foot
accompanied by acute pains. Different treatments have only had a
negative effect, and in a little while a suppurating sore appears
which seems to indicate caries of the bone. Walking becomes more
and more painful and difficult in spite of the treatment. On the
advice of a former patient who had been cured, she comes to me,
and there is noticeable relief after the first visits. Little by little the
swelling goes down, the pain becomes less intense, the suppuration
lessens, and finally the sore heals over. The process has taken a few
months. At present the foot is practically normal, but although the
pain and swelling have entirely disappeared, the back flexion of the
foot is not yet perfect, which makes the patient limp slightly.

Mme. R----, of Chavigny. Metritis dating from 10 years back.
Comes at the end of July, 1916. Improvement is immediate, the pain
and loss of blood diminish rapidly, and by the following 29th of
September both have disappeared. The monthly period, which lasted
from eight to ten days, is now over in four.

Mme. H----, rue Guilbert-de-Piverecourt, at Nancy, aged 49. Suffers
from a varicose ulcer dating from September, 1914, which has
treated according to her doctor's advice, but without success. The
lower part of the leg is enormous (the ulcer, which is as large as a
two franc piece and goes right down to the bone, is situated above
the ankle). The inflammation is very intense, the suppuration
copious, and the pains extremely violent. The patient comes for the
first time in April, 1916, and the improvement which is visible after
the first treatment, continues without interruption. By the 18th of
February, 1917, the swelling has _entirely subsided,_ and the pain
and irritation have disappeared. The sore is still there, but it is no
larger than a pea and it is only a few millimeters in depth; it still
discharges very slightly. By 1920 the cure has long been complete.

Mlle. D----, at Mirecourt, 16 years of age. Has suffered from attacks
of nerves for three years. The attacks, at first infrequent, have
gradually come at closer intervals. When she comes to see me on the
1st of April, 1917, she has had three attacks in the preceding
fortnight. Up to the 18th of April she did not have any at all. I may
add that this young lady, from the time she began the treatment, was
no longer troubled by the bad headaches from which she had
suffered almost constantly.

Mme. M----, aged 43, rue d'Amance, 2, Malzeville. Comes at the
end of 1916 for violent pains in the head from which she has
suffered all her life. After a few visits they vanish completely. Two
months afterwards she realized that she was also cured of a prolapse
of the uterus which she had not mentioned to me, and of which she
was not thinking when she made her autosuggestion. (This result is
due to the words: _"in every respect"_ contained in the formula used
morning and evening.)

Mme. D----, Choisy-le-Roi. Only one general suggestion from me in
July, 1916, and autosuggestion on her part morning and evening. In
October of the same year this lady tells me that she is cured of a
prolapse of the uterus from which she had suffered for more than
twenty years. Up to April, 1920, the cure is still holding good.
(Same remark as in the preceding case.)

Mme. Jousselin, aged 60, rue des Dominicains, 6. Comes on the
20th of July, 1917, for a violent pain in the right leg, accompanied
by considerable swelling of the whole limb. She can only drag
herself along with groans, but after the "seance," to her great
astonishment, she can walk _normally_ without feeling the least
pain. When she comes back four days afterwards, she has had no
return of the pain and the swelling has subsided. This patient tells
me that since she has attended the "seances" she has also been cured
of white discharges, and of enteritis from which she had long
suffered. (Same remark as above.) In November the cure is still
holding good.

Mlle. G. L.----, aged 15, rue du Montet, 88. Has stammered from
infancy. Comes on the 20th of July, 1917, and the stammering
ceases instantly. A month after I saw her again and she had had no
recurrence.

M. Ferry (Eugene), aged 60, rue de la Cote, 56. For five years has
suffered from rheumatic pains in the shoulders and in the left leg.
Walks with difficulty leaning on a stick, and cannot lift the arms
higher than the shoulders. Comes on the 17th of September, 1917.
After the first "seance," the pains vanish completely and the patient
can not only take long strides but even _run._ Still more, he can
whirl both arms like a windmill. In November the cure is still
holding good.

Mme. Lacour, aged 63, chemin des Sables. Pains in the face dating
from more than twenty years back. All treatments have failed. An
operation is advised, but the patient refuses to undergo it. She comes
for the first time on July 25th, 1916, and four days later the pain
ceases. The cure has held good to this day.

Mme. Martin, Grande-Rue (Ville-Vieille), 105. Inflammation of the
uterus of 13 years standing, accompanied by pains and white and red
discharges. The period, which is very painful, recurs every 22 or 23
days and lasts 10-12 days. Comes for the first time on the 15th of
November, 1917, and returns regularly every week. There is visible
improvement after the first visit, which continues rapidly until at the
beginning of January, 1918, the inflammation has entirely
disappeared; the period comes at more regular intervals and without
the slightest pain. A pain in the knee which the patient had had for
13 years was also cured.

Mme. Castelli, aged 41, living at Einville (M.-et M.). Has suffered
from intermittent rheumatic pains in the right knee for 13 years. Five
years ago she had a more violent attack than usual, the leg swells as
well as the knee, then the lower part of the limb atrophies, and the
patient is reduced to walking very painfully with the aid of a stick or
crutch. She comes for the first time on the 5th of November, 1917.
She goes away _without the help of either crutch or stick._ Since
then she no longer uses her crutch at all, but occasionally makes use
of her stick. The pain in the knee comes back from time to time, but
only very slightly.

Mme. Meder, aged 52, at Einville. For six months has suffered from
pain in the right knee accompanied by swelling, which makes it
impossible to bend the leg. Comes for the first time on Dec. 7th,
1917. Returns on Jan. 4th, 1918, saying that she has almost ceased
to suffer and that she can walk normally. After that visit of the 4th,
the pain ceases entirely, and the patient walks like other people.

EMILE COUE.



EDUCATION AS IT OUGHT TO BE

It may seem paradoxical but, nevertheless, the Education of a child
ought to begin before its birth.

In sober truth, if a woman, a few weeks after conception, makes a
mental picture of the sex of the child she is going to bring forth into
the world, of the physical and moral qualities with which she desires
to see it endowed and if she will continue during the time of
gestation to impress on herself the same mental image, the child will
have the sex and qualities desired.

Spartan women only brought forth robust children, who grew to be
redoubtable warriors, because their strongest desire was to give such
heroes to their country; whilst, at Athens, mothers had intellectual
children whose mental qualities were a hundredfold greater than
their physical attributes.

The child thus engendered will be apt to accept readily good
suggestions which may be made to him and to transform them into
autosuggestion which later, will influence the course of his life. For
you must know that all our words, all our acts, are only the result of
autosuggestions caused, for the most part, by the suggestion of
example or speech.

How then should parents, and those entrusted with the education of
children avoid provoking bad autosuggestions and, on the other
hand, influence good autosuggestions?

In dealing with children, always be even-tempered and speak in a
gentle but firm tone. In this way they will become obedient without
ever having the slightest desire to resist authority.

Above all--above all, avoid harshness and brutality, for there the risk
is incurred of influencing an autosuggestion of cruelty accompanied
by hate.

Moreover, avoid carefully, in their presence, saying evil of anyone,
as too often happens, when, without any deliberate intention, the
absent nurse is picked to pieces in the drawing-room.

Inevitably this fatal example will be followed, and may produce
later a real catastrophe.

Awaken in them a desire to know the reason of things and a love of
Nature, and endeavor to interest them by giving all possible
explanations very clearly, in a cheerful, good-tempered tone. You
must answer their questions pleasantly, instead of checking them
with--"What a bother you are, do be quiet, you will learn that later."

Never on any account say to a child, "You are lazy and good for
nothing" because that gives birth in him to the very faults of which
you accuse him.

If a child is lazy and does his tasks badly, you should say to him one
day, even if it is not true, "There this time your work is much better
than it generally is. Well done". The child, flattered by the
unaccustomed commendation, will certainly work better the next
time, and, little by little, thanks to judicious encouragement, will
succeed in becoming a real worker.

At all costs avoid speaking of illness before children, as it will
certainly create in them bad autosuggestions. Teach them, on the
contrary, that health is the normal state of man, and that sickness is
an anomaly, a sort of backsliding which may be avoided by living in
a temperate, regular way.

Do not create defects in them by teaching them to fear this or that,
cold or heat, rain or wind, etc. Man is created to endure such
variations without injury and should do so without grumbling.

Do not make the child nervous by filling his mind with stories of
hob-goblins and were-wolves, for there is always the risk that
timidity contracted in childhood will persist later.

It is necessary that those who do not bring up then children
themselves should choose carefully those to whom they are
entrusted. To love them is not sufficient, they must have the
qualities you desire your children to possess.

Awaken in them the love of work and of study, making it easier by
explaining things carefully and in a pleasant fashion, and by
introducing in the explanation some anecdote which will make the
child eager for the following lesson.

Above all impress on them that Work is essential for man, and that
he who does not work in some fashion or another, is a worthless,
useless creature, and that all work produces in the man who engages
in it a healthy and profound satisfaction; whilst idleness, so longed
for and desired by some, produces weariness, neurasthenia, disgust
of life, and leads those who do not possess the means of satisfying
the passions created by idleness, to debauchery and even to crime.

Teach children to be always polite and kind to all, and particularly to
those whom the chance of birth has placed in a lower class than their
own, and also to respect age, and never to mock at the physical or
moral defects that age often produces.

Teach them to love all mankind, without distinction of caste. That
one must always be ready to succor those who are in need of help,
and that one must never be afraid of spending time and money for
those who are in need; in short, that they must think more of others
than of themselves.

In so doing an inner satisfaction is experienced that the egoist ever
seeks and never finds.

Develop in them self-confidence, and teach that, before embarking
upon any undertaking, it should be submitted to the control of
reason, thus avoiding acting impulsively, and, after having reasoned
the matter out, one should form a decision by which one abides,
unless, indeed, some fresh fact proves you may have been mistaken.

Teach them above all that every one must set out in life with a very
definite idea that he will succeed, and that, under the influence of
this idea he will inevitably succeed. Not indeed, that he should
quietly remain expecting events to happen, but because, impelled by
this idea, he will do what is necessary to make it come true.

He will know how to take advantage of opportunities, or even
perhaps of the single opportunity which may present itself, it may be
only a single thread or hair, whilst he who distrusts himself is a
Constant Guignard with whom nothing succeeds, because his efforts
are all directed to that end.

Such a one may indeed swim in an ocean of opportunities, provided
with heads of hair like Absalom himself, and he will be unable to
seize a single hair, and often determines himself the causes which
make him fail; whilst he, who has the idea of success in himself,
often gives birth, in an unconscious fashion, to the very
circumstances which produce that same success.

But above all, let parents and masters preach by example. A child is
extremely suggestive, let something turn up that he wishes to do,
and he does it.

As soon as children can speak, make them repeat morning and
evening, twenty times consecutively:

"Day by day, in all respects, I grow better", which will produce in
them an excellent physical, moral and healthy atmosphere.

If you make the following suggestion you will help the child
enormously to eliminate his faults, and to awaken in him the
corresponding desirable qualities.

Every night when the child is asleep, approach quietly, so as not to
awaken him, to within about three or four feet from his bed. Stand
there, murmuring in a low monotonous voice the thing or things you
wish him to do.

Finally, it is desirable that all teachers should, every morning, make
suggestions to their pupils, somewhat in the following fashion.

Telling them to shut their eyes, they should say: "Children, I expect
you always to be polite and kind to everyone, obedient to your
parents and teachers, when they give you an order, or tell you
anything; you will always listen to the order given or the fact told
without thinking it tiresome; you used to think it tiresome when you
were reminded of anything, but now you understand very well that it
is for your good that you are told things, and consequently, instead
of being cross with those who speak to you, you will now be
grateful to them.

"Moreover you will now love your work, whatever it may be; in
your lessons you will always enjoy those things you may have to
learn, especially whatever you may not till now have cared for.

"Moreover when the teacher is giving a lesson in class, you will now
devote all your attention, solely and entirely to what he says, instead
of attending to any silly things said or done by your companions,
and without doing or saying anything silly yourself.

"Under these conditions as you are all intelligent, for, children, you
are all intelligent, you will understand easily and remember easily
what you have learned. It will remain embedded in your memory,
ready to be at your service, and you will be able to make use of it as
soon as you need it.

"In the same way when you are working at your lessons alone, or at
home, when you are accomplishing a task or studying a lesson, you
will fix your attention solely on the work you are doing, and you
will always obtain good marks for your lessons."

This is the Counsel, which, if followed faithfully and truly from
henceforth, will produce a race endowed with the highest physical
and moral qualities.

Emile Coue.



A SURVEY OF THE "SEANCES" AT M. COUE'S

The town thrills at this name, for from every rank of society people
come to him and everyone is welcomed with the same benevolence,
which already goes for a good deal. But what is extremely poignant
is at the end of the seance to see the people who came in gloomy,
bent, almost hostile (they were in pain), go away like everybody else;
unconstrained, cheerful, sometimes radiant (they are no longer in
pain!!). With a strong and smiling goodness of which he has the
secret, M. Coue, as it were, holds the hearts of those who consult
him in his hand; he addresses himself in turn to the numerous
persons who come to consult him, and speaks to them in these terms:

"Well, Madame, and what is your trouble? . . ."

Oh, you are looking for two many whys and wherefores; what does
the cause of your pain matter to you? You are in pain, that is
enough . . . I will teach you to get rid of that. . . .

---

And you, Monsieur, your varicose ulcer is already better. That is
good, very good indeed, do you know, considering you have only
been here twice; I congratulate you on the result you have obtained.
If you go on doing your autosuggestions properly, you will very
soon be cured. . . . You have had this ulcer for ten years, you say?
What does that matter? You might have had it twenty and more, and
it could be cured just the same.

---

And you say that you have not obtained any improvement? . . . Do
you know why? . . . Simply because you lack confidence in yourself.
When I tell you that you are better, you feel better at once, don't you?
Why? Because you have faith in me. Just believe in yourself and
you will obtain the same result.

---

Oh, Madame not so many details, I beg you! By looking out for the
details you create them, and you would want a list a yard long to
contain all your maladies. As a matter of fact, with you it is the
mental outlook which is wrong. Well, make up your mind that it is
going to get better and it will be so. It's as simple as the
Gospel. . . .

---

You tell me you have attacks of nerves every week. . . . Well, from
to-day you are going to do what I tell you and you will cease to have
them. . . .

---

You have suffered from constipation for a long time? . . . What does
it matter how long it is? . . . You say it is forty years? Yes, I heard
what you said, but it is none the less true that you can be cured
to-morrow; you hear, to-morrow, on condition, naturally, of your doing
exactly what I tell you to do, in the way I tell you to do it. . . .

---

Ah! you have glaucoma, Madame. I cannot absolutely promise to
cure you of that, for I am not sure that I can. That does not mean that
you cannot be cured, for I have known it to happen in the case of a
lady of Chalon-sur-Saone and another of Lorraine.

Well, Mademoiselle, as you have not had your nervous attacks since
you came here, whereas you used to have them every day, you are
cured. Come back sometimes all the same, so that I may keep you
going along the right lines.

---

The feeling of oppression will disappear with the lesions which will
disappear when you assimilate properly; that will come all in good
time, but you mustn't put the cart before the horse . . . it is the same
with oppression as with heart trouble, it generally diminishes very
quickly. . . .

---

Suggestion does not prevent you from going on with your usual
treatment. . . . As for the blemish you have on your eye, and which is
lessening almost daily, the opacity and the size are both growing
less every day.

---

To a child (in a clear and commanding voice): "Shut your eyes, I
am not going to talk to you about lesions or anything else, you
would not understand; the pain in your chest is going away, and you
won't want to cough any more."

---

_Observation.--_It is curious to notice that all those suffering from
chronic bronchitis are immediately relieved and their morbid
symptoms rapidly disappear. . . . Children, are very easy and very
obedient subjects; their organism almost always obeys immediately
to suggestion.

---

To a person who complains of fatigue: Well, so do I. There are also
days when it tires me to receive people, but I receive them all the
same and all day long. Do not say: _"I cannot help it." "One can
always overcome oneself."_

_Observation.--_The idea of fatigue necessarily brings fatigue, and
the idea that we have a duty to accomplish always gives us the
necessary strength to fulfill it. The mind can and must remain master
of the animal side of our nature.

---

The cause which prevents you from walking, whatever it is, is going
to disappear little by little every day: you know the proverb:
_Heaven helps those who help themselves._ Stand up two or three
times a day supporting yourself on two persons, and say to yourself
firmly: _My kidneys are not so weak that I cannot do it, on the
contrary I can. . . ._

---

After having said: "Every day, in every respect, I am getting better
and better," add: "The people who are pursuing me _cannot_ pursue
me any more, they are not pursuing me. . . ."

---

What I told you is quite true; it was enough to think that you had no
more pain for the pain to disappear; _do not think then that it may
come back or it will come back. . . ._

(A woman, sotto voice, "What patience he has! What a wonderfully
painstaking man!")

---

ALL THAT WE THINK BECOMES TRUE FOR US.  WE MUST
NOT THEN ALLOW OURSELVES TO THINK WRONGLY.

---

THINK "MY TROUBLE IS GOING AWAY," JUST AS YOU
THINK YOU CANNOT OPEN YOUR HANDS.

The more you say: _"I will not,"_ the more surely the contrary
comes about. You must say: _"It's going away,"_ and think it. Close
your hand and think properly: "Now I cannot open it." Try! (she
cannot), you see that your will is not much good to you.

_Observation.--This is the essential point of the method._ In order to
make auto-suggestions, you must eliminate the _will_ completely
and only address yourself to the _imagination,_ so as to avoid a
conflict between them in which the will would be vanquished.

---

To become stronger as one becomes older seems paradoxical, but it
is true.

---

For diabetes: Continue to use therapeutic treatments; I am quite
willing to make suggestions to you, but I cannot promise to cure you.

_Observation._--I have seen diabetes completely cured several
times, and what is still more extraordinary, the albumen diminish
and even disappear from the urine of certain patients.

---

This obsession must be a real nightmare. The people you used to
detest are becoming your friends, you like them and they like you.

Ah, but to _will_ and to _desire_ is not the _same_ thing.

---

Then, after having asked them to close their eyes, M. Coue gives to
his patients the little suggestive discourse which is to be found in
"Self Mastery." When this is over, he again addresses himself to
each one separately, saying to each a few words on his case:

To the first: "You, Monsieur, are in pain, but I tell you that, from
to-day, the cause of this pain whether it is called arthritis or anything
else, is going to disappear with the help of your unconscious, and
the cause having disappeared, the pain will gradually become less
and less, and in a short time it will be nothing but a moment."

To the second person: "Your stomach does not function properly, it
is more or less dilated. Well, as I told you just now, your digestive
functions are going to work better and better, and I add that the
dilatation of the stomach is going to disappear little by little. Your
organism is going to give back progressively to your stomach the
force and elasticity it had lost, and by degrees as this phenomenon is
produced, the stomach will return to its primitive form and will
carry out more and more easily the necessary movements to pass
into the intestine the nourishment it contains. At the same time the
pouch formed by the relaxed stomach will diminish in size, the
nutriment will not longer stagnate in this pouch, and in consequence
the fermentation set up will end by totally disappearing."

To the third: "To you, Mademoiselle, I say that whatever lesions you
may have in your liver, your organism is doing what is necessary to
make the lesions disappear every day, and by degrees as they heal
over, the symptoms from which you suffer will go on lessening and
disappearing. Your liver then functions in a more and more normal
way, the bile it secretes is alcaline and no longer acid, in the right
quantity and quality, so that it passes naturally into the intestines and
helps intestinal digestion."

To the fourth: "My child, you hear what I say; every time you feel
you are going to have an attack, you will hear my voice telling you
as quick as lightning: 'No, no! my friend, you are not going to have
that attack, and it is going to disappear before it comes. . . .'"

To the fifth, etc., etc.

When everyone has been attended to, M. Coue tells those present to
open their eyes, and adds: "You have heard the advice I have just
given you. Well, to transform it into reality, what you must do is this:
_As long as you live,_ every morning before getting up, and every
evening as soon as you are in bed, you must shut your eyes, so as to
concentrate your attention, and repeat twenty times following,
moving your _lips_ (that is indispensable) and counting
_mechanically_ on a string with twenty knots in it the following
phrase: _'Every day, in every respect, I am getting better and
better.'"_

There is no need to think of anything in particular, as the words _"in
every respect"_ apply to everything. This autosuggestion must be
made with confidence, with faith, with the certainty of obtaining
what is desired. The greater the conviction of the person, the greater
and the more rapid will be the results obtained.

Further, every time that in the course of the day or night you feel
any physical or mental discomfort, _affirm_ to yourself that you will
not consciously contribute to it, and that you are going to make it
vanish; then isolate yourself as much as possible, and passing your
hand over your forehead if it is something mental, or on whatever
part that is painful if it is something physical, repeat _very quickly,_
moving the lips, the words: "It is going, it is going . . ., etc., etc." as
long as it is necessary. With a little practice, the mental or physical
discomfort will disappear in about 20 to 25 seconds. Begin again
every time it is necessary.

For this as for the other autosuggestions it is necessary to act with
the same confidence, the same conviction, the same faith, and above
all without effort.

M. Coue also adds what follows: "If you formerly allowed yourself
to make bad autosuggestions because you did it unconsciously, now
that you know what I have just taught you, you must no longer let
this happen. And if, in spite of all, you still do it, you must only
accuse yourself, and say _'Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.'"_

And now, if a grateful admirer of the work and of the founder of the
method may be allowed to say a few words, I will say. "Monsieur
Coue shows us luminously that the power to get health and
happiness is within us: we have indeed received this gift."

Therefore, suppressing, first of all, every cause of suffering _created
or encouraged by ourselves,_ then putting into practice the favorite
maxim of Socrates: "Know thyself," and the advice of Pope: "That I
may reject none of the benefits that Thy goodness bestows upon
me," let us take possession of the entire benefit of autosuggestion,
let us become this very day members of the "Lorraine Society of
applied Psychology;" let us make members of it those who may be
in our care (it is a good deed to do to them).

By this means we shall follow first of all the great movement of the
future of which M. E. Coue is the originator (he devotes to it his
days, his nights, his worldly goods, and refuses to accept . . . but
hush; no more of this! lest his modesty refuses to allow these lines to
be published without alteration), but above all by this means we
shall know exactly the days and hours of his lectures at Paris, Nancy
and other towns, where he devotedly goes to sow the good seed, and
where we can go too to see him, and hear him and consult him
personally, and with his help awake or stir up in ourselves the
personal power that everyone of us has received of becoming happy
and well.

May I be allowed to add that when M. Coue has charged an entrance
fee for his lectures, they have brought in thousands of francs for the
Disabled and others who have suffered through the war.

E. Vs----oer.

_Note._--Entrance is free to the members of the Lorraine Society of
applied Psychology.



EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS ADDRESSED TO M. COUE

The final results of the English secondary Certificate have only been
posted up these two hours, and I hasten to tell you about it, at least
in so far as it concerns myself. I passed the viva voce _with flying
colors,_ and scarcely felt a trace of the nervousness which used to
cause me such an intolerable sensation of nausea before the tests.
During the latter I was astonished at my own calm, which gave those
who listened to me the impression of perfect self-possession on my
part. In short, it was just the tests I dreaded most which contributed
most to my success. The jury placed me Second, and I am infinitely
grateful to you for help, which undoubtedly gave me an advantage
over the other candidates . . ., etc. (The case is that of a young lady,
who, on account of excessive nervousness, had failed in 1915. The
nervousness having vanished under the influence of autosuggestion,
she passed successfully, being-placed 2nd out of more than 200
competitors.)

          Mlle. V----,
     _Schoolmistress, August,_ 1916.

***

It is with very great pleasure that I write to thank you most sincerely
for the great benefit I have received from your method. Before I
went to you I had the greatest difficulty in walking 100 yards,
without being out of breath, whereas now I can go miles without
fatigue. Several times a day and quite easily, I am able to walk in 40
minutes from the rue du Bord-de-l'Eau to the rue des Glacis, that is
to say, nearly four kilometers. The asthma from which I suffered has
almost entirely disappeared.

Yours most gratefully.

          Paul Chenot,
     _Rue de Strasbourg,_ 141 _Nancy, Aug.,_ 1917.

***

I do not know how to thank you. Thanks to you I can say that I am
almost entirely cured, and I was only waiting to be so in order to
express my gratitude. I was suffering from two varicose ulcers, one
on each foot. That on the right foot, which was _as big as my hand,_
is entirely _cured._ It seemed to disappear by magic. For weeks I
had been confined to my bed, but almost immediately after I
received your letter the ulcer healed over so that I could get up. That
on the left foot is not yet absolutely healed, but will soon be so.
Night and morning I do, and always shall, recite the prescribed
formula, in which I have entire confidence. I may say also that my
legs were as hard as a stone and I could not bear the slightest touch.
Now I can press them without the least pain, and I can walk once
more, which is the greatest joy.

          Mme. Ligny,
     _Mailleroncourt-Charette (Haute Saone), May,_ 1918.

***

N. B.--It is worthy of remark that this lady never saw M. Coue, and
that it is only thanks to a letter he wrote her on April 15th, that she
obtained the result announced in her letter of May 3rd.

***

I am writing to express my gratitude, for thanks to you I have
escaped the risk of an operation which is always a very dangerous
one. I can say more: you have saved my life, for your method of
autosuggestion has done alone what all the medicines and treatments
ordered for the terrible intestinal obstruction from which I suffered
for 19 days, had failed to do. From the moment when I followed
your instructions and applied your excellent principles, my functions
have accomplished themselves quite naturally.

          Mme. S----,
     _Pont a Mousson, Feb.,_ 1920.

***

I do not know how to thank you for my happiness in being cured.
For more than 15 years I had suffered from attacks of asthma, which
caused the most painful suffocations every night. Thanks to your
splendid method, and above all, since I was present at one of your
seances, the attacks have disappeared as if by magic. It is a real
miracle, for the various doctors who attended me all declared that
there was no cure for asthma.

          Mme. V----,
     _Saint-Die, Feb.,_ 1920.

***

I am writing to thank you with all my heart for having brought to my
knowledge, a new therapeutic method, a marvellous instrument
which seems to act like the magic wand of a fairy, since, thanks to
the simplest means, it brings about the most extraordinary results.
From the first I was extremely interested in your experiments, and
after my own personal success with your method, I began ardently
to apply it, as I have become an enthusiastic supporter of it.

          Docteur Vachet,
     _Vincennes, May,_ 1920.

***

For 8 years I have suffered from prolapse of the uterus. I have used
your method of autosuggestion for the last five months, and am now
completely cured, for which I do not know how to thank you enough.

          Mme. Soulier,
     _Place du Marche Toul, May,_ 1920.

***

I have suffered terribly for 11 years without respite. Every night I
had attacks of asthma, and suffered also from insomnia and general
weakness which prevented any occupation. Mentally, I was
depressed, restless, worried, and was inclined to make mountains
out of mole hills. I had followed many treatments without success,
having even undergone in Switzerland the removal of the turbinate
bone of the nose without obtaining any relief. In Nov., 1918, I
became worse in consequence of a great sorrow. While my husband
was at Corfu (he was an officer on a warship), I lost our only son in
six days from influenza. He was a delightful child of ten, who was
the joy of our life; alone and overwhelmed with sorrow, I
reproached myself bitterly for not having been able to protect and
save our treasure. I wanted to lose my reason or to die. . . . When my
husband returned (which was not until February), he took me to a
new doctor who ordered me various remedies and the waters of
Mont-Dore. I spent the month of August in that station, but on my
return I had a recurrence of the asthma, and I realized with despair
that _"in every respect"_ I was getting worse and worse. It was then
that I had the pleasure of meeting you. Without expecting much
good from it, I must say, I went to your October lectures, and I am
happy to tell you that by the end of November I was cured. Insomnia,
feelings of oppression, gloomy thoughts, disappeared as though by
magic, and I am now well and strong and full of courage. With
physical health I have recovered my mental equilibrium, and but for
the ineffaceable wound caused by my child's loss, I could say that I
am perfectly happy. Why did I not meet you before? My child
would have known a cheerful and courageous mother. Thank you
again and again, M. Coue.

Yours most gratefully,

          E. Itier,
     _Rue de Lille, Paris, April,_ 1920.

***

I can now take up again the struggle I have sustained for 30 years,
and which had exhausted me.

I found in you last August a wonderful and providential help.
Coming home to Lorraine for a few days, ill, and with my heart full
of sorrow, I dreaded the shock which I should feel at the sight of the
ruins and distress . . . and went away comforted and in good health. I
was at the end of my tether, and unfortunately I am not religious. I
longed to find some one who could help me, and meeting you by
chance at my cousin's house you gave me the very help I sought. I
can now work in a new spirit, I suggest to my unconscious to
re-establish my physical equilibrium, and I do not doubt that I shall
regain my former good health. A very noticeable improvement has
already shown itself, and you will better understand my gratitude
when I tell you that, suffering from diabetes with a renal
complication, I have had several attacks of glaucoma, but my eyes
are now recovering their suppleness. Since then my sight has
become almost normal, and my general health has much improved.

          Mlle. Th----,
     _Professor at the Young Ladies' College at Ch----, Jan.,_ 1920.

***

I read my thesis with success, and was awarded the highest mark
and the congratulations of the jury. Of all these "honours" a large
share belongs to you, and I do not forget it. I only regretted that you
were not present to hear your name referred to with warm and
sympathetic interest by the distinguished Jury. You can consider that
the doors of the University have been flung wide open to your
teaching. Do not thank me for it, for I owe you far more than you
can owe me.

          Ch. Baudouin,
     _Professor at the Institut. J.-J. Rousseau, Geneva._

***

. . . I admire your courageousness, and am quite sure that it will help
to turn many friends into a useful and intelligent direction. I confess
that I have personally benefited by your teaching, and have made
my patients do so too.

At the Nursing Home we try to apply your method collectively, and
have already obtained visible results in this way.

          Docteur Berillon,
     _Paris, March,_ 1920.

***

. . . I have received your kind letter as well as your very interesting
lecture.

I am glad to see that you make a rational connection between hetero
and autosuggestion, and I note particularly the passage in which you
say that the will must not intervene in autosuggestion. That is what a
great number of professors of autosuggestion, unfortunately
including a large number of medical men, do not realize at all. I also
think that an absolute distinction should be established between
autosuggestion and the training of the will.

          Docteur Van Velsen,
     _Brussels, March,_ 1920.

***

What must you think of me? That I have forgotten you? Oh, no, I
assure you that I think of you with the most grateful affection, and I
wish to repeat that your teachings are more and more efficacious; I
never spend a day without using autosuggestion with increased
success, and I bless you every day, for your method is the true one.
Thanks to it, I am assimilating your excellent directions, and am
able to control myself better every day, and I feel that I am
_stronger. . . ._ I am sure that you would find it difficult to recognize
in this woman, so active in spite of her 66 years, the poor creature
who was so often ailing, and who only began to be well, thanks to
you and your guidance. May you be blessed for this, for the sweetest
thing in the world is to do good to those around us. You do much,
and do a little, for which I thank God.

          Mme. M----,
     _Cesson-Saint-Brieuc._

***

As I am feeling better and better since I began to follow your
method of autosuggestion, I should like to offer you my sincere
thanks. The lesion in the lungs has disappeared, my heart is better. I
have no more albumen, in short I am quite well.

          Mme. Lemaitre,
     _Richemont, June,_ 1920.

***

Your booklet and lecture interested us very much. It would be
desirable for the good of humanity that they should be published in
several languages, so that they might penetrate to every race and
country, and thus reach a greater number of unfortunate people who
suffer from the wrong use of that all-powerful (and almost divine)
faculty, the most important to man, as you affirm and prove so
luminously and judiciously, which we call the Imagination. I had
already read many books on the will, and had quite an arsenal of
formulae, thoughts, aphorisms, etc. Your phrases are conclusive. I
do not think that ever before have "compressed tablets of self
confidence."--as I call your healing phrases--been condensed into
typical formulae in such an intelligent manner.

          Don Enrique C----,
     _Madrid._

***

Your pamphlet on "the self-control" contains very strong arguments
and very striking examples. I think that the substitution of
imagination for the power of the will is a great progress. It is milder
and more persuasive.

          A. F----,
     _Reimiremont._

***

. . . I am happy to be able to tell you that my stomach is going on
well. My metritis is also much better. My little boy had a gland in
his thigh as big as an egg which is gradually disappearing.

          E. L----,
     _Saint-Clement (M-et-M.)_

***

After I had undergone three operations in my left leg on account of a
local tuberculosis, that leg became ill again in September, 1920.
Several doctors declared that a new operation was necessary. They
were about to open my leg from the knee to the ankle, and if the
operation had failed, they would have had to perform an amputation.

As I had heard of your wondrous cures I came and saw you for the
first time on the 6th of November, 1920. After the seance, I felt
immediately a little better. I exactly followed your instructions and
went three times to you. At the third time, I could tell you that I was
completely cured.

          Mme. L----,
     _Henry (Lorraine)._

***

. . . I will not wait any longer to thank you heartily for all the good I
owe you. Autosuggestion has positively transformed me and I am
now getting much better than I have been these many years. The
symptoms of illness have disappeared little by little, the morbid
symptoms have become rarer and rarer, and all the functions of the
body work now normally. The result is that, after having become
thinner and thinner during several years I have regained several
kilos in a few months.

I cannot do otherwise than bless the Coue system.

          L----,
     _Cannes (A. M.)._

***

Since 1917, my little girl has been suffering from epileptic crises.
Several doctors had told me that about the age of 14 or 15 they
would disappear or become worse. Having heard of you, I sent her
to you from the end of December till May. Now her cure is complete,
for during six months she has had no relapse.

          Perrin (Charles),
     _Essey-les Nancy._

***

For eight years, I had suffered from a sinking of the uterus. After
having practiced your autosuggestion for five months, I have been
radically cured. I don't know how to express my deep gratitude.

          Mme. Soulie,
     6, _Place du Marche, Toul._

***

. . . Having suffered from a glaucoma since 1917, I have consulted
two oculists who told me that only an operation would put an end to
my sufferings, but unfortunately neither of them would assure me of
a good result.

In the month of June, 1920, after having attended one of your
seances I felt much better. In September I ceased to use the drops of
pilocarpine which were the daily bread of my eye, and since then I
have felt no more pain. My pupil is no more dilated, my eyes are
normal; it is a real miracle.

          Mme. M----,
     _a Soulosse._

***

A dedication to M. Coue by the author of a medical treatise:

To M. Coue who knew how to dissect the human soul and to extract
from it a psychologic method founded on conscious autosuggestion.

The master is entitled to the thanks of all; he has cleverly succeeded
in disciplining the vagrant (Imagination) and in associating it
usefully with the will.

Thus he has given man the means of increasing tenfold his moral
force by giving him confidence in himself.

          Docteur P. R.,
     _Francfort._

***

. . . It is difficult to speak of the profound influence exercised on me
by your so kindly allowing me to view so often your work. Seeing it
day by day, as I have done, it has impressed me more and more, and
as you yourself said, there seems no limits to the possibilities and
future scope of the principles you enunciate, not only in the physical
life of children but also in possibilities for changing the ideas now
prevalent in punishment of crime, in government, in fact, in all the
relations of life. . . .

     Miss Josephine M. Richardson.

***

. . . When I came, I expected a great deal, but what I have seen,
thanks to your great kindness, exceeds greatly my expectation.

          Montagu S. Monier-Williams, M. D.,
     _London._



FRAGMENTS FROM LETTERS
Addressed to Mme. Emile Leon, Disciple of M. Coue

For some time I have been wanting to write and thank you
most sincerely for having made known to me this method of
autosuggestion. Thanks to your good advice the attacks of nerves to
which I was subject, have entirely disappeared, and I am certain that
I am quite cured. Further, I feel myself surrounded by a superior
force which is an unfaltering guide, and by whose aid I surmount
with ease the difficulties of life.

          Mme. F----,
     _Rue de Bougainville,_ 4, _Paris._

***

Amazed at the results obtained by the autosuggestion which you
made known to me, I thank you with all my heart.

For a year I have been entirely cured of articular rheumatism of the
right shoulder from which I had suffered for eight years, and from
chronic bronchitis which I had had still longer. The numerous
doctors I had consulted declared me incurable, but thanks to you and
to your treatment, I have found with perfect health the conviction
that I possess the power to keep it.

          Mme. L. T----,
     _Rue du Laos,_ 4, _Paris._

***

I want to tell you what excellent results M. Coue's wonderful
method has produced in my case, and to express my deep gratitude
for your valuable help. I have always been anaemic, and have had
poor health, but after my husband's death I became much worse. I
suffered with my kidneys, I could not stand upright, I also suffered
from nervousness and aversions. All that has gone and I am a
different person. I no longer suffer, I have more endurance, and I am
more cheerful. My friends hardly recognize me, and I feel a new
woman. I intend to spread the news of this wonderful method, so
clear, so simple, so beneficent, and to continue to get from it the best
results for myself as well.

          M. L. D----,
     _Paris, June,_ 1920.

***

I cannot find words to thank you for teaching me your good method.
What happiness you have brought to me! I thank God who led me to
make your acquaintance, for you have entirely transformed my life.
Formerly I suffered terribly at each monthly period and was obliged
to lie in bed. Now all is quite regular and painless. It is the same
with my digestion, and I am no longer obliged to live on milk as I
used, and I have no more pain, which is a joy. My husband is
astonished to find that when I travel I have no more headaches,
whereas before I was always taking tablets. Now, thanks to you, I
need no remedies at all, but I do not forget to repeat 20 times
morning and evening, the phrase you taught me: "Every day, in
every respect, I am getting better and better."

          B. P----,
     _Paris, October,_ 1920.

***

In re-reading the method I find it more and more superior to all the
developments inspired by it. It surpasses all that has been invented
of so-called scientific systems, themselves based on the uncertain
results of an uncertain science, which feels its way and deceives
itself, and of which the means of observation are also fairly
precarious in spite of what the learned say, M. Coue, on the other
hand, suffices for everything, goes straight to the aim, attains it with
certainty and in freeing his patient carries generosity and knowledge
to its highest point, since he leaves to the patient himself the merit of
this freedom, and the use of a marvellous power. No, really, there is
nothing to alter in this method. It is as you so strikingly say: a
Gospel. To report faithfully his acts and words and spread his
method, that is what must be done, and what I shall do myself as far
as is in any way possible.

          P. C.

***

I am amazed at the results that I have obtained and continue to
obtain daily, by the use of the excellent method you have taught me
of conscious autosuggestion. I was ill mentally and physically. Now
I am well and am also nearly always cheerful. That is to say that my
depression has given way to cheerfulness, and certainly I do not
complain of the change, for it is very preferable, I assure you. How
wretched I used to be! I could digest nothing; now I digest perfectly
well and the intestines act naturally. I also used to sleep so badly,
whereas now the nights are not long enough; I could not work, but
now I am able to work hard. Of all my ailments nothing is left but an
occasional touch of rheumatism, which I feel sure will disappear like
the rest by continuing your good method. I cannot find words to
express my deep gratitude to you.

          Mme. Friry,
     _Boulevard Malesherbes, Paris._


EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS
_Addressed to Mlle. Kaufmant, Disciple of M. Coue_

As I have been feeling better and better since following the method
of autosuggestion which you taught me, I feel I owe you the
sincerest thanks, I am now qualified to speak of the great and
undeniable advantages of this method, as to it alone I owe my
recovery. I had a lesion in the lungs which caused me to spit blood. I
suffered from lack of appetite, daily vomiting, loss of flesh, and
obstinate constipation. The spitting of blood, lessened at once and
soon entirely disappeared. The vomiting ceased, the constipation no
longer exists, I have got back my appetite, and in two months I have
gained nearly a stone in weight. In the face of such results observed,
not only by parents and friends, but also by the doctor who has been
attending me for several months, it is impossible to deny the good
effect of autosuggestion and not to declare openly that it is to your
method that I owe my return to life. I authorize you to publish my
name if it is likely to be of service to others, and I beg you to believe
me.

Yours most gratefully.

          Jeanne Gilli,
     15, _Av. Borriglione, Nice, March,_ 1918.

***

I consider it a duty to tell you how grateful I am to you for
acquainting me with the benefits of autosuggestion. Thanks to you, I
no longer suffer from those agonizing and frequent heart stoppages,
and I have regained my appetite which I had lost for months. Still
more, as a hospital nurse, I must thank you from my heart for the
almost miraculous recovery of one of my patients, seriously ill with
tuberculosis, which caused him to vomit blood constantly and
copiously. His family and myself were very anxious when heaven
sent you to him. After your first visit the spitting of blood ceased,
his appetite returned, and after a few more visits made by you to his
sick bed, all the organs little by little resumed their normal functions.
At last one day we had the pleasant surprise and joy of seeing him
arrive at your private seance, where, before those present, he himself
made the declaration of his cure, due to your kind intervention.
Thank you with all my heart.

Yours gratefully and sympathetically,

          A. Kettner,
     26, _Av. Borriglione, Nice, March,_ 1918.

***

. . . From day to day I have put off writing to you to thank you for
the cure of my little Sylvain. I was in despair, the doctors telling me
that there was nothing more to be done but to try the sanitorium of
Arcachon or Juicoot, near Dunkirk. I was going to do so when Mine.
Collard advised me to go and see you. I hesitated, as I felt sceptical
about it; but I now have the proof of your skill, for Sylvain has
completely recovered. His appetite is good, his pimples and his
glands are completely cured, and what is still more extraordinary,
since the first time that we went to see you he has not coughed any
more, not even once; the result is, that since the month of June he
has gained 6 lbs.; I can never thank you enough and I proclaim to
everyone the benefits we have received.

          Mme. Poirson,
     _Liverdun, August,_ 1920.

***

How can I prove to you my deep gratitude? You have saved my life.
I had a displaced heart, which caused terrible attacks of suffocation,
which went on continually; in fact they were so violent that I had no
rest day or night, in spite of daily injections of morphia. I could eat
nothing without instant vomiting. I had violent pains in the head
which became all swollen, and as a result I lost my sight. I was in a
lamentable state and my whole organism suffered from it. I had
abscesses on the liver. The doctor despaired of me after having tried
everything; blood letting, cupping and scarifying, poultices, ice, and
every possible remedy, without any improvement. I had recourse to
your kindness on the doctor's advice.

After your first visits the attacks became less violent and less
frequent, and soon disappeared completely. The bad and troubled
nights became calmer, until I was able to sleep the whole night
through without waking. The pains I had in the liver ceased
completely. I could begin to take my food again, digesting it
perfectly well, and I again experienced the feeling of hunger which I
had not known for months. My headaches ceased, and my eyes,
which had troubled me so much, are quite cured, since I am now
able to occupy myself with a little manual work.

At each visit that you paid me, I felt that my organs were resuming
their natural functions. I was not the only one to observe it, for the
doctor who came to see me every week found me much better, and
finally there came recovery, since I could get up after having been in
bed eleven months. I got up without any discomfort, not even the
least giddiness, and in a fortnight I could go out. It is indeed thanks
to you that I am cured, for the doctor says that for all that the
medicines did me, I might just as well have taken none.

After having been given up by two doctors who held out no hope of
cure, here I am cured all the same, and it is indeed a complete cure,
for now I can eat meat, and I eat a pound of bread every day. How
can I thank you, for I repeat, it is thanks to the suggestion you taught
me that I owe my life.

          Jeanne Grosjean,
     _Nancy, Nov.,_ 1920.

***

. . . Personally the science of autosuggestion--for I consider it as
entirely a _science--_has rendered me great services; but truth
compels me to declare that if I continue to interest myself
particularly in it, it is because I find in it the means of exercising
true charity.

In 1915 when I was present for the first time at M. Coue's lectures, I
confess that I was entirely sceptical. Before facts a _hundred times_
repeated in my presence, I was obliged to surrender to evidence, and
recognize that autosuggestion always acted, though naturally in
different degrees, on organic diseases. The only cases (and those
were very rare) in which I have seen it fail are nervous cases,
neurasthenia or imaginary illness.

There is no need to tell you again that M. Coue, like yourself, but
even more strongly, insists on this point: "that he never performs a
miracle or cures anybody, but that he shows people how to cure
themselves." I confess that on this point I still remain a trifle
incredulous, for if M. Coue does not actually cure people, he is a
powerful aid to their recovery, in "giving heart" to the sick, in
teaching them never to despair, in uplifting them, in leading them . . .
higher than themselves into moral spheres that the majority of
humanity, plunged in materialism, has never reached.

The more I study autosuggestion, the better I understand the divine
law of confidence and love that Christ preached us: "Thou shalt love
thy neighbor" and by giving a little of one's heart and of one's moral
force to help him to rise if he has fallen and to cure himself if he is
ill. Here also from my Christian point of view, is the application of
autosuggestion which I consider as a beneficial and comforting
science which helps us to understand that as the children of God, we
all have within us forces whose existence we did not suspect, which
properly directed, serve to elevate us morally and to heal us
physically.

Those who do not know your science, or who only know it
imperfectly, should not judge it without having seen the results it
gives and the good it does. Believe me to be your faithful admirer.

          M. L. D----,
     _Nancy, November,_ 1920.



THE MIRACLE WITHIN

_(Reprinted from the "Renaissance politique, litteraire et artistique"
of the 18th of December,_ 1920)

HOMAGE TO EMILE COUE

In the course of the month of September, 1920, I opened for the first
time the book of Charles Baudouin, of Geneva, professor at the
Institute J. J. Rousseau in that town.

This work, published by the firm of Delachaux and Niestle, 26, rue
Saint-Dominique, Paris, is called: "Suggestion et Autosuggestion".
The author has dedicated it: _"To Emile Coue, the initiator and
benefactor, with deep gratitude"._

I read it and did not put down the book until I had reached the end.

The fact is that it contains the very simple exposition of a
magnificently humanitarian work, founded on a theory which may
appear childish just because it is within the scope of everyone. And
if everyone puts it into practice, the greatest good will proceed from
it.

After more than twenty years of indefatigable work, Emile Coue
who at the present time lives at Nancy, where he lately followed the
work and experiments of Liebault, the father of the doctrine of
suggestions, for more than twenty years, I say, Coue has been
occupied exclusively with this question, but particularly in order to
bring his fellow creatures to cultivate _autosuggestion._

At the beginning of the century Coue had attained the object of his
researches, and had disengaged the general and immense force of
autosuggestion. After innumerable experiments on thousands of
subjects, _he showed the action of the unconscious in organic
cases._ This is new, and the great merit of this profoundly, modest
learned man, is to have found a remedy for terrible ills, reputed
incurable or terribly painful, without any hope of relief.

As I cannot enter here into long scientific details I will content
myself by saying how the learned man of Nancy practises his
method.

The chiselled epitome of a whole life of patient researches and of
ceaseless observations, is a brief formula which is to be repeated
morning and evening.

It must be said in a low voice, with the eyes closed, in a position
favourable to the relaxing of the muscular system, it may be in bed,
or it may be in an easy chair, and in a tone of voice as if one were
reciting a litany.

Here are the magic words: _"Every day, in every respect, I am
getting better and better"._

They must be said twenty times following, with the help of a string
with twenty knots in it, which serves as a rosary. This material detail
has its importance; it ensures mechanical recitation, which is
essential.

While articulating these words, _which are registered by the
unconscious,_ one must not think of anything particular, neither of
one's illness nor of one's troubles, one must be passive, just with the
desire that all may be for the best. The formula _"in every respect"_
has a general effect.

This desire must be expressed without passion, without will, with
gentleness, _but with absolute confidence._

For Emile Coue at the moment of autosuggestion, _does not call in
the will in any way, on the contrary;_ there must be no question of
the will at that moment, but the _imagination,_ the great motive
force infinitely more active than that which is usually invoked, the
imagination alone must be brought into play.

"Have confidence in yourself," says this good counsellor, "believe
firmly that all will be well". And indeed all is well for those who
have faith, fortified by perseverance.

As deeds talk louder than words, I will tell you what happened to
myself before I had ever seen M. Coue.

I must go back then to the month of September when I opened M.
Charles Baudouin's volume. At the end of a substantial exposition,
the author enumerates the cure of illnesses such as enteritis, eczema,
stammering, dumbness, a sinus dating from twenty years back which
had necessitated eleven operations, metritis, salpingitis, fibrous
tumours, varicose veins, etc., lastly and above all, deep tubercular
sores, and the last stages of phthisis (case of Mme. D----, of Troyes,
aged 30 years, who has become a mother since her cure; case was
followed up, but there was no relapse). All this is often testified to
by doctors in attendance on the patients.

These examples impressed me profoundly; _there_ was the miracle.
It was not a question of nerves, but of ills which medicine attacks
without success. This cure of tuberculosis was a revelation to me.

Having suffered for two years from acute neuritis in the face, I was
in horrible pain. Four doctors, two of them specialists, had
pronounced the sentence which would be enough, of itself alone, to
increase the trouble by its fatal influence on the mind: "Nothing to
be done!" This "nothing to be done" had been for me the worst of
autosuggestions.

In possession of the formula: "Every day, in every respect . . .", etc., I
recited it with a faith which, although it had come suddenly, was
none the less capable of removing mountains, and throwing down
shawls and scarves, bareheaded, I went into the garden in the rain
and wind repeating gently _"I am going to be cured,_ I shall have no
more neuritis, it is going away, it will not come back, etc. . . ." The
next day I was cured and never any more since have I suffered from
this abominable complaint, which did not allow me to take a step out
of doors and made life unbearable. It was an immense joy. The
incredulous will say: "It was all nervous." Obviously, and I give
them this first point. But, delighted with the result, I tried the Coue
Method for an oedema of the left ankle, resulting from an affection
of the kidneys reputed incurable. In two days the oedema had
disappeared. I then treated fatigue and mental depression, etc., and
extraordinary improvement was produced, and I had but one idea: to
go to Nancy to thank my benefactor.

I went there and found the excellent man, attractive by his goodness
and simplicity, who has become my friend.

It was indispensable to see him in his field of action. He invited me
to a popular "seance." I heard a concert of gratitude. Lesions in the
lungs, displaced organs, asthma, Pott's disease (!), paralysis, the
whole deadly horde of diseases were being put to flight. I saw a
paralytic, who sat contorted and twisted in his chair, get up and walk.
M. Coue had spoken, he demanded confidence, great, immense
confidence in oneself. He said: "Learn to cure yourselves, you can
do so; I have never cured anyone. The power is within you
yourselves, call upon your spirit, make it act for your physical and
mental good, and it will come, it will cure you, you will be strong
and happy". Having spoken, Coue approached the paralytic: "You
heard what I said, do you believe that you will walk?" "Yes."--"Very
well then, get up!" The woman got up, she walked, and went round
the garden. The miracle was accomplished.

A young girl with Pott's disease, whose vertebral column became
straight again after three visits, told me what an intense happiness it
was to feel herself coming back to life after having thought herself a
hopeless case.

Three women, cured of lesions in the lungs, expressed their delight
at going back to work and to a normal life. Coue in the midst of
those people whom he loves, seemed to me a being apart, for this
man ignores money, all his work is gratuitous, and his extraordinary
disinterestedness forbids his taking a farthing for it. "I owe you
something", I said to him, "I simply owe you everything. . . ." "No,
only the pleasure I shall have from your continuing to keep well. . . ."

An irresistible sympathy attracts one to this simple-minded
philanthropist; arm in arm we walked round the kitchen garden
which he cultivates himself, getting up early to do so. Practically a
vegetarian, he considers with satisfaction the results of his work.
And then the serious conversation goes on: "In your _mind_ you
possess an _unlimited_ power. It acts on matter if we know how to
domesticate it. The imagination is like a horse without a bridle; if
such a horse is pulling the carriage in which you are, he may do all
sorts of foolish things and take you to your death. But harness him
properly, drive him with a sure hand, and he will go wherever you
like. Thus it is with the mind, the imagination. They must be
directed for our own good. Autosuggestion, formulated with the lips,
is an order which the unconscious receives, it carries it out unknown
to ourselves and above all at night, so that the evening
autosuggestion is the most important. It gives marvelous results."

When you feel a physical pain, add the formula _"It is going
away . . .",_ very quickly repeated, in a kind of droning voice,
placing your hand on the part where you feel the pain, or on the
forehead, if it is a mental distress.

For the method acts very efficaciously on the mind. After having
called in the help of the soul for the body, one can ask it again for all
the circumstances and difficulties of life.

There also I know from experience that events can be singularly
modified by this process.

You know it to-day, and you will know it better still by reading M.
Baudouin's book, and then his pamphlet: _"Culture de la force
morale",_ and then, lastly, the little succinct treatise written by M.
Coue himself: _"Self Mastery."_ All these works may be found at M.
Coue's.

If however I have been able to inspire in you the desire of making
this excellent pilgrimage yourself, you will go to Nancy to fetch the
booklet. Like myself you will love this unique man, unique by
reason of his noble charity and of his love for his fellows, as Christ
taught it.

Like myself also, you will be cured physically and mentally. Life
will seem to you better and more beautiful. That surely is worth the
trouble of trying for.

          M. Burnat-Provins.



SOME NOTES ON THE JOURNEY OF M. COUE TO PARIS IN
OCTOBER, 1919

The desire that the teachings of M. Coue in Paris last October should
not be lost to others, has urged me to write them down. Putting aside
this time the numerous people, physically or mentally ill, who have
seen their troubles lessen and disappear as the result of his
beneficent treatment, let us begin by quoting just a few of his
teachings.

_Question._--Why is it that I do not obtain better results although I
use your method and prayer?

_Answer._--Because, probably, at the back of your mind there is an
_unconscious doubt,_ or because you make _efforts._ Now,
remember that efforts are determined by the will; if you bring the
will into play, you run a serious risk of bringing the imagination into
play too, but in the contrary direction, which brings about just the
reverse of what you desire.

_Question._--What are we to do when something troubles us?

_Answer._--When something happens that troubles you, _repeat_ at
once "No, that does not trouble me at all, not in the least, the fact is
rather agreeable than otherwise." In short, the idea is to work
ourselves up in a good sense instead of in a bad.

_Question._--Are the preliminary experiments indispensable if they
are unacceptable to the pride of the subject?

_Answer._--No, they are not indispensable, but they are of great
utility; for although they may seem childish to certain people, they
are on the contrary extremely serious; they do indeed prove three
things:

1. That every idea that we have in our minds becomes _true_ for us,
and has a tendency to transform itself into action.

2. That when there is a conflict between the imagination and the will,
it is always the imagination which wins; and in this case we do
exactly the _contrary_ of what we wish to do.

3. That it is easy for us to put into our minds, _without any effort,_
the idea that we wish to have, since we have been able without effort
to think in succession: "I cannot," and then "I can."

The preliminary experiments should not be repeated at home; alone,
one is often unable to put oneself in the right physical and mental
conditions, there is a risk of failure, and in this case one's
self-confidence is shaken.

_Question._--When one is in pain, one cannot help thinking of one's
trouble.

_Answer._--Do not be afraid to think of it; on the contrary, do think
of it, but to say to it, "I am not _afraid_ of you."

If you go anywhere and a dog rushes at you barking, look it firmly
in the eyes and it will not bite you; but if you fear it, if you turn back,
he will soon have his teeth in your legs.

_Question._--And if one does a retreat?

_Answer._--Go backwards.

_Question._--How can we realize what we desire?

_Answer._--By often repeating what you desire: "I am gaining
assurance," and you will do so; "My memory is improving," and it
really does so; "I am becoming absolutely master of myself," and
you find that you are becoming so.

If you say the contrary, it is the contrary which will come about.

What you say persistently and very quickly _comes to pass_ (within
the domain of the reasonable, of course).

Some testimonies:

A young lady to another lady: "How simple it is! There is nothing to
add to it: he seems inspired. Do you not think that there are beings
who radiate influence?"

. . . An eminent Parisian doctor to numerous doctors surrounding
him: "I have entirely come over to the ideas of M. Coue."

. . . A Polytechnician, a severe critic, thus defines M. Coue: "He is a
Power."

. . . Yes, he is a Power of Goodness. Without mercy for the bad
autosuggestions of the "defeatist" type, but indefatigably painstaking,
active and smiling, to help everyone to develop their personality,
and to teach them to cure themselves, which is the characteristic of
his beneficent method.

How could one fail to desire from the depths of one's heart that all
might understand and seize the "good news" that M. Coue brings?
"It is the awakening, possible for everyone, of the personal power
which he has _received_ of being happy and well."

It is, _if one consents,_ the full development of this power which
can transform one's life.

Then, and is it not quite rightly so? it is the strict duty (and at the
same time the happiness) of those who have been initiated, to spread
by every possible means the knowledge of this wonderful method,
the happy results of which have been recognized and verified by
_thousands_ of persons, to make it known to those who suffer, who
are sad, or who are overburdened . . . to all! and to help them to put it
into practice.

Then, thinking of France, triumphant but bruised, of her defenders
victorious but mutilated, of all the physical and moral suffering
entailed by the war; may those who-have the power (the greatest
power ever given to man is the power of doing good [Socrates]) see
that the inexhaustible reservoir of physical and moral forces that the
"Method" puts within our reach may soon become the-patrimony of
all the nation and through it of humanity.

Mme. Emile Leon,
_Collaborator, in Paris, of M. Emile Coue_



"EVERYTHING FOR EVERYONE"

By Mme. Emile Leon, Disciple of M. Coue.

When one has been able to take advantage of a great benefit; when
this benefit is within reach of everyone, although almost everyone is
ignorant of it, is it not an urgent and absolute duty (for those who are
initiated) to make it known to those around them? For all can make
their own the amazing results of the "Emile Coue Method."

To drive away pain is much . . . but how much more is it to lead into
the possession of a new life _all_ those who suffer. . . .

Last April we had the visit of M. Emile Coue at Paris, and here are
some of his teachings:

_Question._--Question of a theist: I think it is unworthy of the
Eternal to make our obedience to his will, depend on what M. Coue
calls a trick or mechanical process: conscious autosuggestion.

_M. Coue._--Whether we wish it or not, our imagination always
overrules our will, when they are in conflict. We can lead it into the
right path indicated by our reason, by _consciously_ employing the
mechanical process that we employ _unconsciously_ often to lead
into the wrong.

And the thoughtful questioner says to herself: "Yes, it is true, in this
elevated sphere of thought, conscious autosuggestion has the power
to free us from obstacles _created by ourselves,_ which might as it
were put a veil between us and God, just as a piece of stuff, hanging
in a window, can prevent the sun from coming into a room."

_Question._--How ought one to set about bringing those dear to one
who may be suffering, to make themselves good autosuggestions
which would set them free?

_Answer._--Do not insist or lecture them about it. Just remind them
simply that I advise them to make an autosuggestion with the
_conviction_ that they will obtain the result they want.

_Question._--How is one to explain to oneself and to explain to
others that the repetition of the same words: "I am going to sleep. . . .
It is going away . . ." etc., has the power to produce the effect, and
above all so powerful an effect that it is a certain one?

_Answer._--The repetition of the same words forces one to think
them, and when we think them they become true for us and
transform themselves into reality.

_Question._--How is one to keep inwardly the mastery of oneself?

_Answer._--To be master of oneself it is enough to think that one is
so, and in order to think it, one should often repeat it without making
any effort.

_Question._--And outwardly, how is one to keep one's liberty?

_Answer._--Self mastery applies just as much physically as
mentally.

_Question_(Affirmation).--It is impossible to escape trouble or
sadness, if we do not do as we should, it would not be just, and
autosuggestion, cannot . . . and ought not to prevent _just suffering._

_M. Coue_(very seriously and affirmatively).--Certainly and
assuredly it ought not to be so, but it is so often . . . at any rate for a
time.

_Question._--Why did that patient who has been entirely cured,
continually have those terrible attacks?

_Answer._--He expected his attacks, he feared them . . . and so he
_provoked_ them; if this gentleman gets well into his mind the idea
that he will have no more attacks, he will not have any; if he thinks
that he will have them, he will indeed do so.

_Question._--In what does your method differ from others.

_Answer._--The differ not the _will_ which rules us but the
_imagination;_ that is the basis, the fundamental basis.

_Question._--Will you give me a summary of your "Method" for
Mme. R----, who is doing an important work?

_M. E. Coue._--Here is the summary of the "Method" in a few
words: Contrary to what is taught, it is not our will which makes us
act, but our imagination (the unconscious). If we often do act as we
_will,_ it is because at the same time we think that we can. If it is
not so, we do exactly the reverse of what we wish. Ex: The more a
person with insomnia _determines_ to sleep, the more excited she
becomes; the more we _try_ to remember a name which we think
we have forgotten, the more it escapes us (it comes back only if, in
your mind, you replace the idea: "I have forgotten", by the idea "it
will come back"); the more we strive to prevent ourselves from
laughing, the more our laughter bursts out; the more we _determine_
to avoid an obstacle, when learning to bicycle, the more we rush
upon it.

We must then apply ourselves to directing our _imagination_ which
now directs us; in this way we easily arrive at becoming masters of
ourselves physically and morally.

How are we to arrive at this result? By the practice of conscious
_autosuggestion._

Conscious autosuggestion is based on this principle. Every idea that
we have in our mind becomes true for us and tends to realize itself.

Thus, if we _desire_ something, we can obtain it at the end of a
more or less long time, if we often repeat that this thing is going to
come, or to disappear, according to whether it is a good quality or a
fault, either physical or mental.

Everything is included by employing night and morning the general
formula: "Every day, _in every respect,_ I am getting better and
better".

_Question._--For those who are sad--who are in distress?

_Answer._--As long as you think: "I am sad", you _cannot_ be
cheerful, and in order to think something, it is enough to say without
effort: "I do think this thing--"; as to the distress it will disappear,
however violent it may be, _that_ I _can_ affirm.

A man arrives bent, dragging himself painfully along, leaning on
two sticks; he has on his face an expression of dull depression. As
the hall is filling up, M. E. Coue enters. After having questioned this
man, he says to him something like this: "So you have had
rheumatism for 32 years and you cannot walk. Don't be afraid, it's
not going to last as long as that again."

Then after the preliminary experiments: "Shut your eyes, and repeat
very quickly indeed, moving your lips, the words: 'It is going, it is
going' (at the same time M. Coue passes his hand over the legs of
the patient, for 20 to 25 seconds). Now you are no longer in pain, get
up and walk (the patient walks) quickly! quicker! more quickly still!
and since you can walk so well, you are going to run; run! Monsieur,
run!" The patient runs (joyously, almost as if he had recovered his
youth), to his great astonishment, and also to that of the numerous
persons present at the seance of April 27th, 1920. (Clinic of Dr.
Berillon.)

A lady declares: "My husband suffered from attacks of asthma for
many years, he had such difficulty in breathing that we feared a fatal
issue; his medical adviser, Dr. X---- had given him up. He was
almost radically cured of his attacks, after only one visit from M.
Coue".

A young woman comes to thank M. Coue with lively gratitude. Her
doctor, Dr. Vachet, who was with her in the room, says that the
cerebral anaemia from which she had suffered for a long while,
which he had not succeeded in checking by the usual means, had
disappeared as if by magic through the use of conscious
autosuggestion.

Another person who had had a fractured leg and could not walk
without pain and limping, could at once walk normally. No more
pain, no more limping.

In the hall which thrills with interest, joyful testimonies break out
from numerous persons who have been relieved or cured.

A doctor: "Autosuggestion is the weapon of healing". As to this
philosopher who writes (he mentions his name), he relies on the
_genius_ of Coue.

A gentleman, a former magistrate, whom a lady had asked to
express his appreciation, exclaims in a moved tone: "I cannot put my
appreciation into words--I think it is admirable--" A woman of the
world, excited by the disappearance of her sufferings: "Oh, M. Coue,
one could kneel to you--You are the merciful God!" Another lady,
very much impressed herself, rectifies: "No, his messenger".

An aged lady: It is delightful, when one is aged and fragile, to
replace a feeling of general ill health by that of refreshment and
general well-being, and M. E. Coue's method can, I affirm for I have
proved it, produce this happy result, which is all the more complete
and lasting since it relies on the all-powerful force which is within
us.

A warmly sympathetic voice calls him the modest name he prefers
to that of "Master": Professor Coue.

A young woman who has been entirely won over: "M. Coue goes
straight to his aim, attains it with sureness, and, in setting free his
patient, carries generosity and knowledge to its highest point, since
he leaves to the patient himself the merit of his liberation and the use
of a marvellous power".

A literary man, whom a lady asks to write a little _"chef d'oeuvre"_
on the beneficent "Method" refuses absolutely, emphasizing the
simple words which, used according to the Method, help to make all
suffering disappear: "IT IS GOING AWAY--_that_ is the _chef-d'oeuvre!"_
he affirms.

And the thousands of sick folks who have been relieved or cured
will not contradict him.

A lady who has suffered much declares: "In re-reading the 'Method'
I find it more and more superior to the developments it has inspired;
there is really nothing to take away nor add to this 'Method'--all
that is left is to spread it. I shall do so in every possible way."

And now in conclusion I will say: Although M. Coue's modesty
makes him reply to everyone:

I have no magnetic fluid--

I have no influence--

I have never cured anybody--

My disciples obtain the same results as myself--

"I can say in all sincerity that they tend to do so, instructed as they
are in the _valuable 'Method',_ and when, in some far distant future,
the thrilling voice of its author called to a higher sphere can no
longer teach it here below, the 'Method', his work, will help in
aiding, comforting, and curing thousands and thousands of human
beings: it must be _immortal,_ and communicated to the entire
world by generous France--for the man of letters was right, and
knew how to illuminate in a word this true simple, and marvellous
help in conquering pain: 'IT IS GOING AWAY--! _There is the
chef-d'oeuvre!'"_

          B. K. (Emile-Leon).
     Paris, June 6th, 1920.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Self Mastery Through Conscious
Autosuggestion, by Emile Coue

##############################################################################
## THE PRACTICE OF AUTOSUGGESTION — C. Harry Brooks (1922) — the practical how-to manual of the Coue method: session structure, wording, repetition
##############################################################################

Produced by Al Haines










THE PRACTICE OF AUTOSUGGESTION


BY THE METHOD _of_ EMILE COUE

_Revised Edition_


BY

C. HARRY BROOKS



WITH A FOREWORD BY

EMILE COUE



  "For what man knoweth the things of a man save the
  spirit of the man which is in him?"

  1 CORINTHIANS ii. 11.




NEW YORK

DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY

1922




COPYRIGHT 1922

BY DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, INC.


  First Printing, May, 1922
  Second Printing, June, 1922
  Third Printing, June, 1922
  Fourth Printing, July, 1922
  Fifth Printing, July, 1922
  Sixth Printing, Aug., 1922
  Seventh Printing, Aug., 1922
  Eighth Printing, Aug., 1922
  Ninth Printing, Sept., 1922
  Tenth Printing, Sept., 1922
  Eleventh Printing, Nov., 1922
  Twelfth Printing, Nov., 1922
  Thirteenth Printing, Dec., 1922
  Fourteenth Printing, Jan., 1923


  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A. BY
  The Quinn & Boden Company
  BOOK         MANUFACTURERS
  RAHWAY         NEW  JERSEY




TO

ALL IN CONFLICT WITH

THEIR OWN IMPERFECTIONS

THIS LITTLE BOOK

IS DEDICATED




PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION

To my American readers a special word of gratitude is due for their
generosity to this little book.  I hope that it has given them as much
encouragement and help as they have given me.

In America, the home of so many systems of mental healing, it is
perhaps even more necessary than in Europe to insist on the distinctive
features of M. Coue's teaching.  It is based, not on transcendental or
mystical postulates, but on the simple and acknowledged facts of
psychology.  This does not mean that it has no relation to religion.
On the contrary it has a very close one.  Indeed I hope in a future
volume to point out its deep significance for the Christian churches.
But that relationship remains in M. Coue's teaching unexpressed.  The
powers he has revealed are part of the natural endowment of the human
mind.  Therefore they are available to all men, independently of
adherence or non-adherence to any sect or creed.

The method of M. Coue is in no sense opposed to the ordinary practice
of medicine.  It is not intended to supplant it but to supplement it.
It is a new ally, bringing valuable reinforcements to the common
crusade against disease and unhappiness.

Induced Autosuggestion does not involve, as several hasty critics have
assumed, an attack upon the Will.  It simply teaches that during the
actual formulation of suggestions, that is for a few minutes daily, the
Will should be quiescent.  At other times the exercise of the Will is
encouraged; indeed we are shown how to use it properly, that is without
friction or waste of energy.

C. H. B.

19 _October_, 1922.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE

The discoveries of Emile Coue are of such moment for the happiness and
efficiency of the individual life that it is the duty of anyone
acquainted with them to pass them on to his fellows.

The lives of many men and women are robbed of their true value by
twists and flaws of character and temperament, which, while defying the
efforts of the will, would yield rapidly to the influence of
autosuggestion.  Unfortunately, the knowledge of this method has
hitherto been available in England only in the somewhat detailed and
technical work of Professor Charles Baudouin, and in a small pamphlet,
printed privately by M. Coue, which has not been publicly exposed for
sale.  To fill this gap is the aim of the following pages.  They are
designed to present to the layman in non-technical form the information
necessary to enable him to practise autosuggestion for himself.

All readers who wish to obtain a deeper insight into the theoretical
basis of autosuggestion are recommended to study Professor Baudouin's
fascinating work, _Suggestion and Autosuggestion_.  Although in these
pages there are occasional divergences from Professor Baudouin's views,
his book remains beyond question the authoritative statement on the
subject; indeed it is hardly possible without it to form an adequate
idea of the scope of autosuggestion.  My own indebtedness to it in
writing this little volume is very great.

My thanks are due for innumerable kindnesses to M. Coue himself.  That
he is the embodiment of patience everyone knows who has been in contact
with him.  I am also indebted to the Rev. Ernest Charles, of Malvern
Link, who, though disclaiming responsibility for some of the views
expressed here, has made many extremely valuable suggestions.

C. H. B.

MALVERN LINK,
  21 _February_, 1922.




FOREWORD

The materials for this little book were collected by Mr. Brooks during
a visit he paid me in the summer of 1921.  He was, I think, the first
Englishman to come to Nancy with the express purpose of studying my
method of conscious autosuggestion.  In the course of daily visits
extending over some weeks, by attending my consultations, and by
private conversations with myself, he obtained a full mastery of the
method, and we threshed out a good deal of the theory on which it rests.

The results of this study are contained in the following pages.  Mr.
Brooks has skilfully seized on the essentials and put them forward in a
manner that seems to me both simple and clear.  The instructions given
are amply sufficient to enable anyone to practise autosuggestion for
him or herself, without seeking the help of any other person.

It is a method which everyone should follow--the sick to obtain
healing, the healthy to prevent the coming of disease in the future.
By its practice we can insure for ourselves, all our lives long, an
excellent state of health, both of the mind and the body.

E. COUE.

NANCY.




CONTENTS


PREFACE

FOREWORD


I

COUE'S NANCY PRACTICE

CHAPTER

    I  THE CLINIC OF EMILE COUE
   II  A FEW OF COUE'S CURES
  III  THE CHILDREN'S CLINIC


II

THE NATURE OF AUTOSUGGESTION

   IV  THOUGHT IS A FORCE
    V  THOUGHT AND THE WILL


III

THE PRACTICE OF AUTOSUGGESTION

   VI  GENERAL RULES
  VII  THE GENERAL FORMULA
 VIII  PARTICULAR SUGGESTIONS
   IX  HOW TO DEAL WITH PAIN
    X  AUTOSUGGESTION AND THE CHILD
   XI  CONCLUSION




I

COUE'S NANCY PRACTICE



CHAPTER I

THE CLINIC OF EMILE COUE

The clinic of Emile Coue, where Induced Autosuggestion is applied to
the treatment of disease, is situated in a pleasant garden attached to
his house at the quiet end of the rue Jeanne d'Arc in Nancy.  It was
here that I visited him in the early summer of 1921, and had the
pleasure for the first time of witnessing one of his consultations.

We entered the garden from his house a little before nine o'clock.  In
one corner was a brick building of two stories, with its windows thrown
wide to let in the air and sunshine--this was the clinic; a few yards
away was a smaller one-storied construction which served as a
waiting-room.  Under the plum and cherry trees, now laden with fruit,
little groups of patients were sitting on the garden seats, chatting
amicably together and enjoying the morning sunshine while others
wandered in twos and threes among the flowers and strawberry beds.  The
room reserved for the treatments was already crowded, but in spite of
that eager newcomers constantly tried to gain entrance.  The
window-sills on the ground floor were beset, and a dense knot had
formed in the doorway.  Inside, the patients had first occupied the
seats which surrounded the walls, and then covered the available
floor-space, sitting on camp-stools and folding-chairs.  Coue with some
difficulty found me a seat, and the treatment immediately began.

The first patient he addressed was a frail, middle-aged man who,
accompanied by his daughter, had just arrived from Paris to consult
him.  The man was a bad case of nervous trouble.  He walked with
difficulty, and his head, arms and legs were afflicted with a continual
tremor.  He explained that if he encountered a stranger when walking in
the street the idea that the latter would remark his infirmity
completely paralysed him, and he had to cling to whatever support was
at hand to save himself from falling.  At Coue's invitation he rose
from his seat and took a few steps across the floor.  He walked slowly,
leaning on a stick; his knees were half bent, and his feet dragged
heavily along the ground.

Coue encouraged him with the promise of improvement.  "You have been
sowing bad seed in your Unconscious; now you will sow good seed.  The
power by which you have produced these ill effects will in future
produce equally good ones."

The next patient was an excitable, over-worked woman of the artisan
class.  When Coue inquired the nature of her trouble, she broke into a
flood of complaint, describing each symptom with a voluble minuteness.
"Madame," he interrupted, "you think too much about your ailments, and
in thinking of them you create fresh ones."

Next came a girl with headaches, a youth with inflamed eyes, and a
farm-labourer incapacitated by varicose veins.  In each case Coue
stated that autosuggestion should bring complete relief.  Then it was
the turn of a business man who complained of nervousness, lack of
self-confidence and haunting fears.

"When you know the method," said Coue, "you will not allow yourself to
harbour such ideas."

"I work terribly hard to get rid of them," the patient answered.

"You fatigue yourself.  The greater the efforts you make, the more the
ideas return.  You will change all that easily, simply, and above all,
without effort."

"I want to," the man interjected.

"That's just where you're wrong," Coue told him.  "If you say 'I want
to do something,' your imagination replies 'Oh, but you can't.'  You
must say 'I am going to do it,' and if it is in the region of the
possible you will succeed."

A little further on was another neurasthenic--a girl.  This was her
third visit to the clinic, and for ten days she had been practising the
method at home.  With a happy smile, and a little pardonable
self-importance, she declared that she already felt a considerable
improvement.  She had more energy, was beginning to enjoy life, ate
heartily and slept more soundly.  Her sincerity and naive delight
helped to strengthen the faith of her fellow-patients.  They looked on
her as a living proof of the healing which should come to themselves.

Coue continued his questions.  Those who were unable, whether through
rheumatism or some paralytic affection, to make use of a limb were
called on, as a criterion of future progress, to put out their maximum
efforts.

In addition to the visitor from Paris there were present a man and a
woman who could not walk without support, and a burly peasant, formerly
a blacksmith, who for nearly ten years had not succeeded in lifting his
right arm above the level of his shoulder.  In each case Coue predicted
a complete cure.

During this preliminary stage of the treatment, the words he spoke were
not in the nature of suggestions.  They were sober expressions of
opinion, based on years of experience.  Not once did he reject the
possibility of cure, though with several patients suffering from
organic disease in an advanced stage, he admitted its unlikelihood.  To
these he promised, however, a cessation of pain, an improvement of
morale, and at least a retardment of the progress of the disease.
"Meanwhile," he added, "the limits of the power of autosuggestion are
not yet known; final recovery is possible."  In all cases of functional
and nervous disorders, as well as the less serious ones of an organic
nature, he stated that autosuggestion, conscientiously applied, was
capable of removing the trouble completely.

It took Coue nearly forty minutes to complete his interrogation.  Other
patients bore witness to the benefits the treatment had already
conferred on them.  A woman with a painful swelling in her breast,
which a doctor had diagnosed (in Coue's opinion wrongly), as of a
cancerous nature, had found complete relief after less than three
weeks' treatment.  Another woman had enriched her impoverished blood,
and increased her weight by over nine pounds.  A man had been cured of
a varicose ulcer, another in a single sitting had rid himself of a
lifelong habit of stammering.  Only one of the former patients failed
to report an improvement.  "Monsieur," said Coue, "you have been making
efforts.  You must put your trust in the imagination, not in the will.
Think you are better and you will become so."

Coue now proceeded to outline the theory given in the pages which
follow.  It is sufficient here to state his main conclusions, which
were these: (1) Every idea which exclusively occupies the mind is
transformed into an actual physical or mental state.  (2) The efforts
we make to conquer an idea by exerting the will only serve to make that
idea more powerful.  To demonstrate these truths he requested one of
his patients, a young anaemic-looking woman, to carry out a small
experiment.  She extended her arms in front of her, and clasped the
hands firmly together with the fingers interlaced, increasing the force
of her grip until a slight tremor set in.  "Look at your hands," said
Coue, "and think you would like to open them but you cannot.  Now try
and pull them apart.  Pull hard.  You find that the more you try the
more tightly they become clasped together."

The girl made little convulsive movements of her wrists, really doing
her best by physical force to separate her hands, but the harder she
tried the more her grip increased in strength, until the knuckles
turned white with the pressure.  Her hands seemed locked together by a
force outside her own control.

"Now think," said Cone, "'I can open my hands.'"

Slowly her grasp relaxed and, in response to a little pull, the cramped
fingers came apart.  She smiled shyly at the attention she had
attracted, and sat down.

Coue pointed out that the two main points of his theory were thus
demonstrated simultaneously: when the patient's mind was filled with
the thought "I cannot," she could not in very fact unclasp her hands.
Further, the efforts she made to wrench them apart by exerting her will
only fixed them more firmly together.

Each patient was now called on in turn to perform the same experiment.
The more imaginative among them--notably the women--were at once
successful.  One old lady was so absorbed in the thought "I cannot" as
not to heed the request to think "I can."  With her face ruefully
puckered up she sat staring fixedly at her interlocked fingers, as
though contemplating an act of fate.  "Voila," said Coue, smiling, "if
Madame persists in her present idea, she will never open her hands
again as long as she lives."

Several of the men, however, were not at once successful.  The whilom
blacksmith with the disabled arm, when told to think "I should like to
open my hands but I cannot," proceeded without difficulty to open them.

"You see," said Coue, with a smile, "it depends not on what I say but
on what you think.  What were you thinking then?"

He hesitated.  "I thought perhaps I could open them after all."

"Exactly.  And therefore you could.  Now clasp your hands again.  Press
them together."

When the right degree of pressure had been reached, Coue told him to
repeat the words "I cannot, I cannot...."

As he repeated this phrase the contracture increased, and all his
efforts failed to release his grip.

"Voila," said Coue.  "Now listen.  For ten years you have been thinking
you could not lift your arm above your shoulder, consequently you have
not been able to do so, for whatever we think becomes true for us.  Now
think 'I can lift it.'"

The patient looked at him doubtfully.

"Quick!" Coue said in a tone of authority.  "Think 'I can, I can!'"

"I can," said the man.  He made a half-hearted attempt and complained
of a pain in his shoulder.

"Bon," said Coue.  "Don't lower your arm.  Close your eyes and repeat
with me as fast as you can, 'Ca passe, ca passe.'"

For half a minute they repeated this phrase together, speaking so fast
as to produce a sound like the whirr of a rapidly revolving machine.
Meanwhile Coue quickly stroked the man's shoulder.  At the end of that
time the patient admitted that his pain had left him.

"Now think well that you can lift your arm," Coue said.

The departure of the pain had given the patient faith.  His face, which
before had been perplexed and incredulous, brightened as the thought of
power took possession of him.  "I can," he said in a tone of finality,
and without effort he calmly lifted his arm to its full height above
his head.  He held it there triumphantly for a moment while the whole
company applauded and encouraged him.

Coue reached for his hand and shook it.

"My friend, you are cured."

"C'est merveilleux," the man answered.  "I believe I am."

"Prove it," said Coue.  "Hit me on the shoulder."

The patient laughed, and dealt him a gentle rap.

"Harder," Coue encouraged him.  "Hit me harder--as hard as you can."

His arm began to rise and fall in regular blows, increasing in force
until Coue was compelled to call on him to stop.

"Voila, mon ami, you can go back to your anvil."

The man resumed his seat, still hardly able to comprehend what had
occurred.  Now and then he lifted his arm as if to reassure himself,
whispering to himself in an awed voice, "I can, I can."

A little further on was seated a woman who had complained of violent
neuralgia.  Under the influence of the repeated phrase "ca passe" (it's
going) the pain was dispelled in less than thirty seconds.  Then it was
the turn of the visitor from Paris.  What he had seen had inspired him
with confidence; he was sitting more erect, there was a little patch of
colour in his cheeks, and his trembling seemed less violent.

He performed the experiment with immediate success.

"Now," said Coue, "you are cultivated ground.  I can throw out the seed
in handfuls."

He caused the sufferer first to stand erect with his back and knees
straightened.  Then he asked him, constantly thinking "I can," to place
his entire weight on each foot in turn, slowly performing the exercise
known as "marking time."  A space was then cleared of chairs, and
having discarded his stick, the man was made to walk to and fro.  When
his gait became slovenly Coue stopped him, pointed out his fault, and,
renewing the thought "I can," caused him to correct it.  Progressive
improvement kindled the man's imagination.  He took himself in his own
hands.  His bearing became more and more confident, he walked more
easily, more quickly.  His little daughter, all smiles and happy
self-forgetfulness, stood beside him uttering expressions of delight,
admiration and encouragement.  The whole company laughed and clapped
their hands.

"After the sitting," said Coue, "you shall come for a run in my garden."

Thus Coue continued his round of the clinic.  Each patient suffering
from pain was given complete or partial relief; those with useless
limbs had a varying measure of use restored to them.  Coue's manner was
always quietly inspiring.  There was no formality, no attitude of the
superior person; he treated everyone, whether rich or poor, with the
same friendly solicitude.  But within these limits he varied his tone
to suit the temperament of the patient.  Sometimes he was firm,
sometimes gently bantering.  He seized every opportunity for a little
humorous by-play.  One might almost say that he tactfully teased some
of his patients, giving them an idea that their ailment was absurd, and
a little unworthy; that to be ill was a quaint but reprehensible
weakness, which they should quickly get rid of.  Indeed, this denial of
the dignity of disease is one of the characteristics of the place.  No
homage is paid to it as a Dread Monarch.  It is gently ridiculed, its
terrors are made to appear second-rate, and its victims end by laughing
at it.

Coue now passed on to the formulation of specific suggestions.  The
patients closed their eyes, and he proceeded in a low, monotonous
voice, to evoke before their minds the states of health, mental and
physical, they were seeking.  As they listened to him their alertness
ebbed away, they were lulled into a drowsy state, peopled only by the
vivid images he called up before the eyes of the mind.  The faint
rustle of the trees, the songs of the birds, the low voices of those
waiting in the garden, merged into a pleasant background, on which his
words stood out powerfully.

This is what he said:

"Say to yourself that all the words I am about to utter will be fixed,
imprinted and engraven in your minds; that they will remain fixed,
imprinted and engraven there, so that without your will and knowledge,
without your being in any way aware of what is taking place, you
yourself and your whole organism will obey them.  I tell you first that
every day, three times a day, morning, noon and evening, at mealtimes,
you will be hungry; that is to say you will feel that pleasant
sensation which makes us think and say: 'How I should like something to
eat!'  You will then eat with excellent appetite, enjoying your food,
but you will never eat too much.  You will eat the right amount,
neither too much nor too little, and you will know intuitively when you
have had sufficient.  You will masticate your food thoroughly,
transforming it into a smooth paste before swallowing it.  In these
conditions you will digest it well, and so feel no discomfort of any
kind either in the stomach or the intestines.  Assimilation will be
perfectly performed, and your organism will make the best possible use
of the food to create blood, muscle, strength, energy, in a word--Life.

"Since you have digested your food properly, the excretory functions
will be normally performed.  This will take place every morning
immediately on rising, and without your having recourse to any laxative
medicine or artificial means of any kind.

"Every night you will fall asleep at the hour you wish, and will
continue to sleep until the hour at which you desire to wake next
morning.  Your sleep will be calm, peaceful and profound, untroubled by
bad dreams or undesirable states of body.  You may dream, but your
dreams will be pleasant ones.  On waking you will feel well, bright,
alert, eager for the day's tasks.

"If in the past you have been subject to depression, gloom and
melancholy forebodings, you will henceforward be free from such
troubles.  Instead of being moody, anxious and depressed, you will be
cheerful and happy.  You will be happy even if you have no particular
reason for being so, just as in the past you were, without good reason,
unhappy.  I tell you even that if you have serious cause to be worried
or depressed, you will not be so.

"If you have been impatient or ill-tempered, you will no longer be
anything of the kind; on the contrary, you will always be patient and
self-controlled.  The happenings which used to irritate you will leave
you entirely calm and unmoved.

"If you have sometimes been haunted by evil and unwholesome ideas, by
fears or phobias, these ideas will gradually cease to occupy your mind.
They will melt away like a cloud.  As a dream vanishes when we wake, so
will these vain images disappear.

"I add that all your organs do their work perfectly.  Your heart beats
normally and the circulation of the blood takes place as it should.
The lungs do their work well.  The stomach, the intestines, the liver,
the biliary duct, the kidneys and the bladder, all carry out their
functions correctly.  If at present any of the organs named is out of
order, the disturbance will grow less day by day, so that within a
short space of time it will have entirely disappeared, and the organ
will have resumed its normal function.

"Further, if in any organ there is a structural lesion, it will from
this day be gradually repaired, and in a short period will be
completely restored.  This will be so even if you are unaware that the
trouble exists.

"I must also add--and it is extremely important--that if in the past
you have lacked confidence in yourself, this self-distrust will
gradually disappear.  You will have confidence in yourself; I repeat,
_you will have confidence_.  Your confidence will be based on the
knowledge of the immense power which is within you, by which you can
accomplish any task of which your reason approves.  With this
confidence you will be able to do anything you wish to do, provided it
is reasonable, and anything it is your duty to do.

"When you have any task to perform you will always think that it is
easy.  Such words as 'difficult,' 'impossible,' 'I cannot' will
disappear from your vocabulary.  Their place will be taken by this
phrase: 'It is easy and I can.'  So, considering your work easy, even
if it is difficult to others, it will become easy to you.  You will do
it easily, without effort and without fatigue."

These general suggestions were succeeded by particular suggestions
referring to the special ailments from which Coue's patients were
suffering.  Taking each case in turn, he allowed his hand to rest
lightly on the heads of the sufferers, while picturing to their minds
the health and vigour with which they would soon be endowed.  Thus to a
woman with an ulcerated leg he spoke as follows: "Henceforth your
organism will do all that is necessary to restore your leg to perfect
health.  It will rapidly heal; the tissues will regain their tone; the
skin will be soft and healthy.  In a short space of time your leg will
be vigorous and strong and will in future always remain so."  Each
special complaint was thus treated with a few appropriate phrases.
When he had finished, and the patients were called on to open their
eyes, a faint sigh went round the room, as if they were awaking
reluctantly from a delicious dream.

Coue now explained to his patients that he possessed no healing powers,
and had never healed a person in his life.  They carried in themselves
the instrument of their own well-being.  The results they had seen were
due to the realisation of each patient's own thought.  He had been
merely an agent calling the ideas of health into their minds.
Henceforth they could, and must, be the pilots of their own destiny.
He then requested them to repeat, under conditions which will be later
defined, the phrase with which his name is associated: "Day by day, in
every way, I'm getting better and better."[1]

The sitting was at an end.  The patients rose and crowded round Coue,
asking questions, thanking him, shaking him by the hand.  Some declared
they were already cured, some that they were much better, others that
they were confident of cure in the future.  It was as if a burden of
depression had fallen from their minds.  Those who had entered with
minds crushed and oppressed went out with hope and optimism shining in
their faces.

But Coue waved aside these too insistent admirers, and, beckoning to
the three patients who could not walk, led them to a corner of the
garden where there was a stretch of gravel path running beneath the
boughs of fruit trees.  Once more impressing on their minds the thought
of strength and power, he induced each one to walk without support down
this path.  He now invited them to run.  They hesitated, but he
insisted, telling them that they could run, that they ought to run,
that they had but to believe in their own power, and their thought
would be manifested in action.

They started rather uncertainly, but Coue followed them with persistent
encouragements.  They began to raise their heads, to lift their feet
from the ground and run with greater freedom and confidence.  Turning
at the end of the path they came back at a fair pace.  Their movements
were not elegant, but people on the further side of fifty are rarely
elegant runners.  It was a surprising sight to see these three
sufferers who had hobbled to the clinic on sticks now covering the
ground at a full five miles an hour, and laughing heartily at
themselves as they ran.  The crowd of patients who had collected broke
into a spontaneous cheer, and Coue, slipping modestly away, returned to
the fresh company of sufferers who awaited him within.



[1] The translation given here of Coue's formula differs slightly from
that popularised in England during his visit of November, 1921.  The
above, however, is the English version which he considers most suitable.




CHAPTER II

A FEW OF COUE'S CURES

To give the reader a better idea of the results which Induced
Autosuggestion is yielding, I shall here describe a few further cases
of which I was myself in some part a witness, and thereafter let some
of Coue's patients speak for themselves through the medium of their
letters.

At one of the morning consultations which I subsequently attended was a
woman who had suffered for five years with dyspepsia.  The trouble had
recently become so acute that even the milk diet to which she was now
reduced caused her extreme discomfort.  Consequently she had become
extremely thin and anaemic, was listless, easily tired, and suffered
from depression.  Early in the proceedings the accounts given by
several patients of the relief they had obtained seemed to appeal to
her imagination.  She followed Coue's remarks with keen interest,
answered his questions vivaciously, and laughed very heartily at the
amusing incidents with which the proceedings were interspersed.  About
five o'clock on the same afternoon I happened to be sitting with Coue
when this woman asked to see him.  Beaming with satisfaction, she was
shown into the room.  She reported that on leaving the clinic she had
gone to a restaurant in the town and ordered a table d'hote luncheon.
Conscientiously she had partaken of every course from the hors
d'oeuvres to the cafe noir.  The meal had been concluded at 1.30, and
she had so far experienced no trace of discomfort.  A few days later
this woman returned to the clinic to report that the dyspepsia had
shown no signs of reappearing; that her health and spirits were
improving, and that she looked upon herself as cured.

On another occasion one of the patients complained of asthma.  The
paroxysms destroyed his sleep at night and prevented him from
performing any task which entailed exertion.  Walking upstairs was a
slow process attended by considerable distress.  The experiment with
the hands was so successfully performed that Coue assured him of
immediate relief.

"Before you go," he said, "you will run up and down those stairs
without suffering any inconvenience."

At the close of the consultation, under the influence of the suggestion
"I can," the patient did this without difficulty.  That night the
trouble recurred in a mild form, but he continued to attend the clinic
and to practise the exercises at home, and within a fortnight the
asthma had finally left him.

Among other patients with whom I conversed was a young man suffering
from curvature of the spine.  He had been attending the clinic for four
months and practising the method at home.  His doctor assured him that
the spine was gradually resuming its normal position.  A girl of
twenty-two had suffered from childhood with epileptic fits, recurring
at intervals of a few weeks.  Since her first visit to the clinic six
months previously the fits had ceased.

But the soundest testimony to the power of Induced Autosuggestion is
that borne by the patients themselves.  Here are a few extracts from
letters received by Coue:

"At the age of sixty-three, attacked for more than thirty years by
asthma and all the complications attendant upon it, I spent
three-quarters of the night sitting on my bed inhaling the smoke of
anti-asthma powders.  Afflicted with almost daily attacks, especially
during the cold and damp seasons, I was unable to walk--I could not
even _go down hill_.

Nowadays I have splendid nights, and have put the powders in a drawer.
Without the slightest hesitation I can go upstairs to the first floor."

  D. (Mont de Marsan.)
  15 _December_, 1921.


"Yesterday I felt really better, that is to say, of my fever, so I
decided to go back to my doctor, whom I had not seen since the summer.
The examination showed a normal appendix.  On the other hand, the
bladder is still painful, but is better.  At any rate, there is at
present no question of the operation which had worried me so much.  I
am convinced that I shall cure myself completely."

  M. D. (Mulhouse.)
  24 _September_, 1921.


"I have very good news to give you of your dipsomaniac--she is cured,
and asserts it herself to all who will listen.  She told me yesterday
that for fourteen years she had not been so long without drink as she
has been lately, and what surprises her so much is that she has not had
to struggle against a desire; she has simply not felt the need of
drink.  Further, her sleep continues to be splendid.  She is getting
more and more calm, in spite of the fact that on several occasions her
sang-froid has been severely tested.  To put the matter in a nutshell,
she is a changed woman.  But what impresses me most is the fact that
when she took to your method she thought herself at the end of her
tether, and in the event of its doing her no good had decided to kill
herself (she had already attempted it once)."

  P. (a Paris doctor.)
  1 _February_, 1922.


"For eight years I suffered with prolapse of the uterus.  I have used
your method of Autosuggestion for the last five months, and am now
completely cured, for which I do not know how to thank you enough."

  S. (Toul).[1]


"I have a son who came back from Germany very anaemic and suffering
from terrible depression.  He went to see you for a short time, and now
is as well as possible.  Please accept my best thanks.  I have also a
little cousin whom you have cured.  He had a nervous illness, and had
become, so to speak, unconscious of what was going on around him.  He
is now completely cured."

  S. E. (Circourt, Vosges.)
  19 _October_, 1921.


"My wife and I have waited nearly a year to thank you for the
marvellous cure which your method has accomplished.  The very violent
attacks of asthma from which my wife suffered have completely
disappeared since the visit you paid us last spring.  The first few
weeks my wife experienced temporary oppression and even the beginnings
of an attack, which, however, she was able to ward off within a few
minutes by practising Autosuggestion.

In spite of her great desire to thank you sooner my wife wished to add
more weight to her testimony by waiting for nearly a year.  But the bad
time for asthma has not brought the slightest hint of the terrible
attacks from which you saved her."

  J. H. (Saarbruck.)
  23 _December_, 1921.


"All the morbid symptoms from which I used to suffer have disappeared.
I used to feel as though I had a band of iron across my brain which
seemed to be red-hot; added to this I had heartburn and bad nights with
fearful dreams; further, I was subject to severe nervous attacks which
went on for months.  I felt as though pegs were being driven into the
sides of my head and nape of my neck, and when I felt I could not
endure these agonies any longer a feeling would come as if my brain
were being smothered in a blanket.  All these pains came and went.  I
had sometimes one, sometimes others.  There were occasions when I
wanted to die--my sufferings were so acute, and I had to struggle
against the idea with great firmness.

At last, having spent five weeks at Nancy attending your kindly
sittings, I have profited so well as to be able to return home in a
state of normal health."

  N. (Pithiviviers le Vieil.)
  16 _August_, 1921.


"After having undergone four operations on the left leg for local
tuberculosis I fell a victim once more to the same trouble on 1
September, 1920.  Several doctors whom I consulted declared a new
operation necessary.  My leg was to be opened from the knee to the
ankle, and if the operation failed nothing remained but an amputation.

Having heard of your cures, I came to see you for the first time on 6
November, 1920.  After the sitting I felt at once a little better.  I
followed your instructions exactly, visiting you three times.  At the
third time I was able to tell you that I was completely cured."

  L. (Herny, Lorraine.)


"I am happy to tell you that a bunion that I had on my foot, which grew
to a considerable size and gave me the most acute pain for over fifteen
years, has gone."

  L. G. (Cauderan, Gironde.)


"I cannot leave France without letting you know how grateful I feel for
the immense service you have rendered me and mine.  I only wish I had
met you years ago.  Practically throughout my career my curse has been
a lack of continuous self-control.

I have been accused of being almost brilliant at times, only to be
followed by periodic relapses into a condition of semi-imbecility and
self-indulgence.

I have done my best to ruin a magnificent constitution, and have wasted
the abilities bestowed upon me.  In a few short days you have made
me--and I feel permanently--master of myself.  How can I thank you
sufficiently?

The rapidity of my complete cure may have been due to what at the time
I regarded as an unfortunate accident.  Slipping on the snow-covered
steps of the train when alighting, I sprained my right knee badly.  At
the breakfast table, before paying you my first visit, a fellow-guest
said to me: 'Tell Monsieur Coue about it.  He will put it all right.'

I laughed and said 'Umph!' to myself, and more for the fun of the thing
than anything else did tell you.  I remember you remarking 'That's
nothing,' and passing on to the more serious part of our conversation,
preliminary to commencing your lecture to the assembled patients.

I became more than interested, and when at the conclusion you suddenly
turned round and asked me: 'How's your knee?' (not having alluded to
knees in particular), and I discovered there _wasn't_ a knee, I laughed
again, as did those who saw me hobble into your room; but I laughed
this time from a sense of bewildered surprise and dawning belief.  This
belief you very soon firmly implanted in me."

  G. H. (London.)
  11 _January_, 1922.



[1] This letter, together with the two quoted on page 34, is reprinted
from the _Bulletin de la Societe Lorraine de Psychologie Appliquee_ of
April, 1921.  They were received by Coue during the preceding three
months.  The other letters were communicated to me privately by Coue
and bear their original dates.




CHAPTER III

THE CHILDREN'S CLINIC

In different parts of France a little band of workers, recruited almost
exclusively from the ranks of former patients, is propagating the ideas
of Emile Coue with a success which almost rivals that of their master.
Among these helpers none is more devoted or more eminently successful
than Mlle. Kauffmant.  She it is who, at the time of my visit, was
managing the children's department of the Nancy clinic.[1]

While Coue was holding his consultations on the ground floor, young
mothers in twos and threes, with their babies in their arms, could be
seen ascending to the upper story, where a little drama was performed
of a very different nature from that going on below.

In a large room, decorated with bright pictures and equipped with toys,
a number of silent young women were seated in a wide circle.  Their
sick children lay in their arms or played at their feet.  Here was a
child whose life was choked at the source by hereditary disease--a
small bundle of skin and bone with limbs like bamboo canes.  Another
lay motionless with closed eyes and a deathly face, as if pining to
return to the world it came from.  A little cripple dragged behind it a
deformed leg as it tried to crawl, and near by a child of five was
beating the air with its thin arms in an exhausting nervous storm.
Older children were also present, suffering from eye and ear trouble,
epilepsy, rickets, any one of the ailments, grave or slight, to which
growing life is subjected.

In the centre of this circle sat a young woman with dark hair and a
kindly keen face.  On her lap was a little boy of four years with a
club foot.  As she gently caressed the foot, from which the clumsy boot
had been removed, she told in a crooning tone, mingled with endearing
phrases, of the rapid improvement which had already begun and would
soon be complete.  The foot was getting better; the joints were more
supple and bent with greater ease; the muscles were developing, the
tendons were drawing the foot into the right shape and making it
straight and strong.  Soon it would be perfectly normal; the little one
would walk and run, play with other children, skip and bowl hoops.  He
would go to school and learn his lessons, would be intelligent and
receptive.  She told him too that he was growing obedient, cheerful,
kind to others, truthful and courageous.  The little boy had put one
arm round her neck and was listening with a placid smile.  His face was
quite contented; he was enjoying himself.

While Mlle. Kauffmant was thus engaged, the women sat silent watching
her intently, each perhaps mentally seeing her own little one endowed
with the qualities depicted.  The children were quiet, some dreamily
listening, some tranquilly playing with a toy.  Except for an
occasional word of advice Mademoiselle was quite indifferent to them.
Her whole attention was given to the child on her knee; her thought
went out to him in a continual stream, borne along by a current of love
and compassion, for she has devoted her life to the children and loves
them as if they were her own.  The atmosphere of the room was more like
that of a church than a hospital.  The mothers seemed to have left
their sorrows outside.  Their faces showed in varying degrees an
expression of quiet confidence.

When this treatment had continued for about ten minutes, Mlle.
Kauffmant returned the child to its mother and, after giving her a few
words of advice, turned to her next patient.  This was an infant of
less than twelve months.  While suffering from no specific disease it
was continually ailing.  It was below normal weight, various foods had
been tried unsuccessfully, and medical advice had failed to bring about
an improvement.  Mademoiselle resumed her seat with the child on her
lap.  For some time the caresses, which were applied to the child's
head and body, continued in silence.  Then she began to talk to it.
Her talk did not consist of connected sentences, as with the elder
child who had learned to speak, but of murmured assurances, as if her
thoughts were taking unconsciously the form of words.  These
suggestions were more general than in the previous case, bearing on
appetite, digestion, assimilation, and on desirable mental and moral
qualities.  The caress continued for about ten minutes, the speech was
intermittent, then the infant was returned to its mother and
Mademoiselle turned her attention to another little sufferer.

With patients who are not yet old enough to speak Mlle. Kauffmant
sometimes trusts to the caress alone.  It seems to transmit the
thoughts of health quite strongly enough to turn the balance in the
child's mind on the side of health.  But all mothers talk to their
children long before the words they use are understood, and Mlle.
Kauffmant, whose attitude is essentially maternal, reserves to herself
the same right.  She adheres to no rigid rule; if she wishes to speak
aloud she does so, even when the child cannot grasp the meaning of her
words.

This is perhaps the secret of her success: her method is plastic like
the minds she works on.  Coue's material--the adult mind--is more
stable.  It demands a clear-cut, distinct method, and leaves less room
for adaptation; but the aim of Mlle. Kauffmant is to fill the child
within and enwrap it without with the creative thoughts of health and
joy.  To this end she enlists any and every means within her power.
The child itself, as soon as it is old enough to speak, is required to
say, morning and night, the general formula: "Day by day, in every way,
I'm getting better and better."  If it is confined to its bed, it is
encouraged to repeat this at any time and to make suggestions of health
similar to those formulated in the sittings.  No special directions are
given as to how this should be done.  Elaborate instructions would only
introduce hindersome complications.  Imagination, the power to pretend,
is naturally strong and active in all children, and intuitively they
make use of it in their autosuggestions.  Moreover, they unconsciously
imitate the tone and manner of their instructress.

But the centre of the child's universe is the mother.  Any system which
did not utilise her influence would be losing its most powerful ally.
The mother is encouraged during the day to set an example of
cheerfulness and confidence, to allude to the malady only in terms of
encouragement--so renewing in the child's mind the prospect of
recovery--and to exclude as far as possible all depressing influences
from its vicinity.  At night she is required to enter the child's
bedchamber without waking the little one and to whisper good
suggestions into its sleeping ear.  Thus Mlle. Kauffmant concentrates a
multiplicity of means to bring about the same result.  In this she is
aided by the extreme acceptivity of the child's mind, and by the
absence of that mass of pernicious spontaneous suggestions which in the
adult mind have to be neutralised and transformed.  It is in children,
then, that the most encouraging results may be expected.  I will quote
three cases which I myself investigated to show the kind of results
Mlle. Kauffmant obtains:

A little girl was born without the power of sight.  The visual organs
were intact, but she was incapable of lifting her eye-lids and so
remained blind to all intents and purposes up to her seventh year.  She
was then brought by the mother to Mlle. Kauffmant.  After a fortnight's
treatment the child began to blink; gradually this action became more
frequent, and a month after the treatment began she could see well
enough to find her way unaided about the streets.  When I saw her she
had learnt to distinguish colours--as my own experiments proved--and
was actually playing ball.  The details supplied by Mlle. Kauffmant
were confirmed by the mother.

A child was born whose tuberculous father had died during the mother's
pregnancy.  Of five brothers and sisters none had survived the first
year.  The doctors to whom the child was taken held out no hope for its
life.  It survived, however, to the age of two, but was crippled and
nearly blind, in addition to internal weaknesses.  It was then brought
to Mlle. Kauffmant.  Three months later, when I saw it, nothing
remained of its troubles but a slight squint and a stiffness in one of
its knee-joints.  These conditions, too, were rapidly diminishing.

Another child, about nine years of age, also of tuberculous parents,
was placed under her treatment.  One leg was an inch and a half shorter
than the other.  After a few months' treatment this disparity had
almost disappeared.  The same child had a wound, also of tuberculous
origin, on the small of the back, which healed over in a few weeks and
had completely disappeared when I saw her.

In each of the above cases the general state of health showed a great
improvement.  The child put on weight, was cheerful and bright even
under the trying conditions of convalescence in a poverty-stricken
home, and in character and disposition fully realised the suggestions
formulated to it.

Since the suggestions of Mlle. Kauffmant are applied individually, the
mothers were permitted to enter and leave the clinic at any time they
wished.  Mademoiselle was present on certain days every week, but this
was not the sum of her labours.  The greater part of her spare time was
spent in visiting the little ones in their own homes.  She penetrated
into the dingiest tenements, the poorest slums, on this errand of
mercy.  I was able to accompany her on several of these visits, and saw
her everywhere received not only with welcome, but with a respect akin
to awe.  She was regarded, almost as much as Coue himself, as a worker
of miracles.  But the reputation of both Coue and Mlle. Kauffmant rests
on a broader basis even than autosuggestion, namely on their great
goodness of heart.

They have placed not only their private means, but their whole life at
the service of others.  Neither ever accepts a penny-piece for the
treatments they give, and I have never seen Coue refuse to give a
treatment at however awkward an hour the subject may have asked it.
The fame of the school has now spread to all parts not only of France,
but of Europe and America.  Coue's work has assumed such proportions
that his time is taken up often to the extent of fifteen or sixteen
hours a day.  He is now nearing his seventieth year, but thanks to the
health-giving powers of his own method he is able to keep abreast of
his work without any sign of fatigue and without the clouding of his
habitual cheerfulness by even the shadow of a complaint.  In fact, he
is a living monument to the efficacy of Induced Autosuggestion.

It will be seen that Induced Autosuggestion is a method by which the
mind can act directly upon itself and upon the body to produce whatever
improvements, in reason, we desire.  That it is efficient and
successful should be manifest from what has gone before.  Of all the
questions which arise, the most urgent from the viewpoint of the
average man seems to be this--Is a suggester necessary?  Must one
submit oneself to the influence of some other person, or can one in the
privacy of one's own chamber exercise with equal success this potent
instrument of health?

Coue's own opinion has already been quoted.  Induced Autosuggestion is
_not_ dependent upon the mediation of another person.  We can practise
it for ourselves without others being even aware of what we are doing,
and without devoting to it more than a few minutes of each day.

Here are a few quotations from letters written by those who have thus
practised it for themselves.


"For a good many years now a rheumatic right shoulder has made it
impossible for me to sleep on my right side and it seriously affected,
and increasingly so, the use of my right arm.  A masseuse told me she
could effect no permanent improvement as there was granulation of the
joints and a lesion.  I suddenly realised two days ago that this
shoulder no longer troubled me and that I was sleeping on that side
without any pain.  I have now lost any sensation of rheumatism in this
shoulder and can get my right arm back as far as the other without the
slightest twinge or discomfort.  I have not applied any remedy or done
anything that could possibly have worked these results except my
practise of Coue."

  L. S. (Sidmouth, Devon).
  1 _January_, 1922.


"At my suggestion a lady friend of mine who had been ill for a good ten
years read _La Maitrise de soi-meme_.  I encouraged her as well as I
could, and in a month she was transformed.  Her husband, returning from
a long journey, could not believe his eyes.  This woman who never got
up till midday, who never left the fire-side, whom the doctors had
given up, now goes out at 10 a.m. even in the greatest cold.  Other
friends are anxiously waiting to read your pamphlet.

  L. C. (Paris).
  17 _December_, 1921.


"I am very much interested in your method, and since your lecture I
have, every night and morning, repeated your little phrase.  I used to
have to take a pill every night, but now my constipation is cured and
the pills are no longer necessary.  My wife is also much better in
every way.  We've both got the bit of string with twenty knots."

  H. (a London doctor).
  7 _January_, 1922.


"Your method is doing me more good every day.  I don't know how to
thank you for the happiness I now experience.  I shall never give up
repeating the little phrase."

  E. B. Guievain (Belgium).
  23 _November_, 1921.


"I have followed your principles for several months and freed myself
from a terrible state of neurasthenia which was the despair of my three
doctors."

  G. (Angouleme).
  23 _January_, 1922.


"My friend Miss C. completely cured herself of a rheumatic shoulder and
knee in a very short time, and then proceeded to turn her attention to
her eyesight.

She had worn spectacles for 30 years and her left eye was much more
short-sighted than her right.  When she began she could only read
(without her glasses and with her left eye) when the book was almost
touching her face.  In six weeks she had extended the limit of vision
so that she saw as far with the left as formerly with the right.
Meanwhile the right had improved equally.  She measured the distances
every week, and when she was here a few days ago she told me she had in
three days gained 4 centimetres with her left and 6 centimetres with
her right eye.  She had done this on her own."

  G. (London).
  5 _January_, 1922.



[1] Since this time (July, 1921), the clinic has been in some respects
reorganized and Mlle. Kauffmant is now pursuing her work independently.




II

THE NATURE OF AUTOSUGGESTION



CHAPTER IV

THOUGHT IS A FORCE

Autosuggestion is not a pseudo-religion like Christian Science or "New
Thought."  It is a scientific method based on the discoveries of
psychology.  The traditional psychology was regarded by the layman, not
without some cause, as a dull and seemingly useless classification of
our conscious faculties.  But within the past twenty-five years the
science has undergone a great change.  A revolution has taken place in
it which seems likely to provoke a revolution equally profound in the
wider limits of our common life.  From a preoccupation with the
conscious it has turned to the Unconscious (or subconscious), to the
vast area of mental activity which exists outside the circle of our
awareness.  In doing so it has grasped at the very roots of life
itself, has groped down to the depths where the "life-force," the elan
vital, touches our individual being.  What this may entail in the
future we can only dimly guess.  Just as the discovery of America
altered the balance of the Old World, shifting it westward to the
shores of the Atlantic, so the discovery and investigation of the
Unconscious seems destined to shift the balance of human life.

Obviously, this is no place to embark on the discussion of a subject of
such extreme complexity.  The investigation of the Unconscious is a
science in itself, in which different schools of thought are seeking to
disengage a basis of fact from conflicting and daily changing theories.
But there is a certain body of fact, experimentally proven, on which
the authorities agree, and of this we quote a few features which
directly interest us as students of autosuggestion.

The Unconscious is the storehouse of memory, where every impression we
receive from earliest infancy to the last hour of life is recorded with
the minutest accuracy.  These memories, however, are not inert and
quiescent, like the marks on the vulcanite records of a gramophone;
they are vitally active, each one forming a thread in the texture of
our personality.  The sum of all these impressions is the man himself,
the ego, the form through which the general life is individualised.
The outer man is but a mask; the real self dwells behind the veil of
the Unconscious.

The Unconscious is also a power-house.  It is dominated by feeling, and
feeling is the force which impels our lives.  It provides the energy
for conscious thought and action, and for the performance of the vital
processes of the body.

Finally the Unconscious plays the part of supervisor over our physical
processes.  Digestion, assimilation, the circulation of the blood, the
action of the lungs, the kidneys and all the vital organs are
controlled by its agency.  Our organism is not a clockwork machine
which once wound up will run of itself.  Its processes in all their
complexity are supervised by mind.  It is not the intellect, however,
which does this work, but the Unconscious.  The intellect still stands
aghast before the problem of the human body, lost like Pascal in the
profundities of analysis, each discovery only revealing new depths of
mystery.  But the Unconscious seems to be familiar with it in every
detail.

It may be added that the Unconscious never sleeps; during the sleep of
the conscious it seems to be more vigilant than during our waking hours.

In comparison with these, the powers of the conscious mind seem almost
insignificant.  Derived from the Unconscious during the process of
evolution, the conscious is, as it were, the antechamber where the
crude energies of the Unconscious are selected and adapted for action
on the world outside us.  In the past we have unduly exaggerated the
importance of the conscious intellect.  To claim for it the discoveries
of civilisation is to confuse the instrument with the agent, to
attribute sight to the field-glass instead of to the eye behind it.
The value of the conscious mind must not be underrated, however.  It is
a machine of the greatest value, the seat of reason, the social
instincts and moral concepts.  But it _is_ a machine and not the
engine, nor yet the engineer.  It provides neither material nor power.
These are furnished by the Unconscious.

These two strata of mental life are in perpetual interaction one with
the other.  Just as everything conscious has its preliminary step in
the Unconscious, so every conscious thought passes down into the lower
stratum and there becomes an element in our being, partaking of the
Unconscious energy, and playing its part in supervising and determining
our mental and bodily states.  If it is a healthful thought we are so
much the better; if it is a diseased one we are so much the worse.  It
is this transformation of a thought into an element of our life that we
call Autosuggestion.  Since this is a normal part of the mind's action
we shall have no difficulty in finding evidence of it in our daily
experiences.

Walking down the street in a gloomy frame of mind you meet a buoyant,
cheery acquaintance.  The mere sight of his genial smile acts on you
like a tonic, and when you have chatted with him for a few minutes your
gloom has disappeared, giving place to cheerfulness and confidence.
What has effected this change?--Nothing other than the idea in your own
mind.  As you watched his face, listened to his good-natured voice,
noticed the play of his smile, your conscious mind was occupied by the
idea of cheerfulness.  This idea on being transferred to the
Unconscious became a reality, so that without any logical grounds you
became cheerful.

Few people, especially young people, are unacquainted with the effects
produced by hearing or reading ghost-stories.  You have spent the
evening, let us say, at a friend's house, listening to terrifying tales
of apparitions.  At a late hour you leave the fireside circle to make
your way home.  The states of fear imaged before your mind have
realised themselves in your Unconscious.  You tread gingerly in the
dark places, hurry past the churchyard and feel a distinct relief when
the lights of home come into view.  It is the old road you have so
often traversed with perfect equanimity, but its cheerful associations
are overlooked and the commonest objects tinged with the colour of your
subjective states.  Autosuggestion cannot change a post into a spectre,
but if you are very impressionable it will so distort your sensory
impressions that common sounds seem charged with supernatural
significance and every-day objects take on terrifying shapes.

In each of the above examples the idea of a mental state--cheerfulness
or fear--was presented to the mind.  The idea on reaching the
Unconscious became a reality; that is to say, you actually became
cheerful or frightened.

The same process is much easier to recognise where the resultant is not
a mental but a bodily state.

One often meets people who take a delight in describing with a wealth
of detail the disorders with which they or their friends are afflicted.
A sensitive person is condemned by social usage to listen to a
harrowing account of some grave malady.  As detail succeeds detail the
listener feels a chilly discomfort stealing over him.  He turns pale,
breaks into a cold perspiration, and is aware of an unpleasant
sensation at the pit of the stomach.  Sometimes, generally where the
listener is a child, actual vomiting or a fainting fit may ensue.
These effects are undeniably physical; to produce them the organic
processes must have been sensibly disturbed.  Yet their cause lies
entirely in the idea of illness, which, ruthlessly impressed upon the
mind, realises itself in the Unconscious.

This effect may be so precise as to reproduce the actual symptoms of
the disease described.  Medical students engaged in the study of some
particular malady frequently develop its characteristic symptoms.

Everyone is acquainted with the experience known as "stage fright."
The victim may be a normal person, healthy both in mind and body.  He
may possess in private life a good voice, a mind fertile in ideas and a
gift of fluent expression.  He may know quite surely that his audience
is friendly and sympathetic to the ideas he wishes to unfold.  But let
him mount the steps of a platform.  Immediately his knees begin to
tremble and his heart to palpitate; his mind becomes a blank or a
chaos, his tongue and lips refuse to frame coherent sounds, and after a
few stammerings he is forced to make a ludicrous withdrawal.  The cause
of this baffling experience lay in the thoughts which occupied the
subject's mind before his public appearance.  He was afraid of making
himself ridiculous.  He expected to feel uncomfortable, feared that he
would forget his speech or be unable to express himself.  These
negative ideas, penetrating to the Unconscious, realised themselves and
precisely what he feared took place.

If you live in a town you have probably seen people who, in carelessly
crossing the street, find themselves in danger of being run down by a
vehicle.  In this position they sometimes stand for an appreciable time
"rooted," as we say, "to the spot."  This is because the danger seems
so close that they imagine themselves powerless to elude it.  As soon
as this idea gives place to that of escape they get out of the way as
fast as they can.  If their first idea persisted, however, the actual
powerlessness resulting from it would likewise persist, and unless the
vehicle stopped or turned aside they would infallibly be run over.

One occasionally meets people suffering from a nervous complaint known
as St. Vitus' Dance.  They have a disconcerting habit of contorting
their faces, screwing round their necks or twitching their shoulders.
It is a well known fact that those who come into close contact with
them, living in the same house or working in the same office, are
liable to contract the same habit, often performing the action without
themselves being aware of it.  This is due to the operation of the same
law.  The idea of the habit, being repeatedly presented to their minds,
realises itself, and they begin to perform a similar movement in their
own persons.

Examples of this law present themselves at every turn.  Have you ever
asked yourself why some people faint at the sight of blood, or why most
of us turn giddy when we look down from a great height?

If we turn to the sufferers from neurosis we find some who have lost
their powers of speech or of vision; some, like the blacksmith we saw
in Coue's clinic, who have lost the use of their limbs; others
suffering from a functional disturbance of one of the vital organs.
The cause in each case is nothing more tangible than an idea which has
become realised in the Unconscious mind.

These instances show clearly enough that the thoughts we think do
actually become realities in the Unconscious.  But is this a universal
law, operating in every life, or merely something contingent and
occasional?  Sometimes irrelevant cheerfulness seems only to make
despondency more deep.  Certain types of individual are only irritated
by the performance of a stage comedy.  Physicians listen to the
circumstantial accounts of their patients' ailments without being in
the least upset.  These facts seem at first sight at variance with the
rule.  But they are only apparent exceptions which serve to test and
verify it.  The physical or mental effect invariably corresponds with
the idea present in the mind, but this need not be identical with the
thought communicated from without.  Sometimes a judgment interposes
itself, or it may be that the idea calls up an associated idea which
possesses greater vitality and therefore dislodges it.  A gloomy person
who meets a cheerful acquaintance may mentally contrast himself with
the latter, setting his own troubles beside the other's good fortune,
his own grounds for sadness beside the other's grounds for
satisfaction.  Thus the idea of his own unhappiness is strengthened and
sinking into the Unconscious makes still deeper the despondency he
experienced before.  In the same way the doctor, listening to the
symptoms of a patient, does not allow these distressful ideas to dwell
in his conscious mind.  His thought passes on immediately to the
remedy, to the idea of the help he must give.  Not only does he
manifest this helpfulness in reasoned action, but also, by Unconscious
realisation, in his very bearing and manner.  Or his mind may be
concentrated on the scientific bearings of the case, so that he will
involuntarily treat the patient as a specimen on which to pursue his
researches.  The steeplejack experiences no giddiness or fear in
scaling a church spire because the thought of danger is immediately
replaced by the knowledge of his own clear head and sure foot.

This brings us to a point which is of great practical importance in the
performance of curative autosuggestion.  No idea presented to the mind
can realise itself unless the mind accepts it.

Most of the errors made hitherto in this field have been due to the
neglect of this fundamental fact.  If a patient is suffering from
severe toothache it is not of the slightest use to say to him: "You
have no pain."  The statement is so grossly opposed to the fact that
"acceptation" is impossible.  The patient will reject the suggestion,
affirm the fact of his suffering, and so, by allowing his conscious
mind to dwell on it, probably make it more intense.

We are now in a position to formulate the basic law of autosuggestion
as follows:--

_Every idea which enters the conscious mind, if it is accepted by the
Unconscious, is transformed by it into a reality and forms henceforth a
permanent element in our life_.

This is the process called "Spontaneous Autosuggestion."  It is a law
by which the mind of man has always worked, and by which all our minds
are working daily.

The reader will see from the examples cited and from others which he
will constantly meet that the thoughts we think determine not only our
mental states, our sentiments and emotions, but the delicate actions
and adjustments of our physical bodies.  Trembling, palpitation,
stammering, blushing--not to speak of the pathological states which
occur in neurosis--are due to modifications and changes in the
blood-flow, in muscular action and in the working of the vital organs.
These changes are not voluntary and conscious ones, they are determined
by the Unconscious and come to us often with a shock of surprise.

It must be evident that if we fill our conscious minds with ideas of
health, joy, goodness, efficiency, and can ensure their acceptation by
the Unconscious, these ideas too will become realities, capable of
lifting us on to a new plane of being.  The difficulty which has
hitherto so frequently brought these hopes to naught is that of
ensuring acceptation.  This will be treated in the next chapter.

To sum up, the whole process  of Autosuggestion consists of two steps:
(1) The acceptation of an idea.  (2) Its transformation into a reality.
Both these operations are performed by the Unconscious.  Whether the
idea is originated in the mind of the subject or is presented from
without by the agency of another person is a matter of indifference.
In both cases it undergoes the same process: it is submitted to the
Unconscious, accepted or rejected, and so either realised or ignored.
Thus the distinction between Autosuggestion and Heterosuggestion is
seen to be both arbitrary and superficial.  In essentials all
suggestion is Autosuggestion.  The only distinction we need make is
between Spontaneous Autosuggestion, which takes place independently of
our will and choice, and Induced Autosuggestion, in which we
consciously select the ideas we wish to realise and purposely convey
them to the Unconscious.




CHAPTER V

THOUGHT AND THE WILL

If we can get the Unconscious to accept an idea, realisation follows
automatically.  The only difficulty which confronts us in the practice
of Induced Autosuggestion is to ensure acceptation, and that is a
difficulty which no method prior to that of Emile Coue has
satisfactorily surmounted.

Every idea which enters the mind is charged, to a greater or less
extent, with emotion.  This emotional charge may be imperceptible, as
with ideas to which we are indifferent, or it may be very great, as
when the idea is closely related to our personal interests.  All the
ideas we are likely to make the subjects of Induced Autosuggestion are
of the latter class, since they refer to health, energy, success or
some goal equally dear to our hearts.  The greater the degree of
emotion accompanying an idea, the more potent is the autosuggestion
resulting from it.  Thus a moment of violent fright may give rise to
effects which last a lifetime.  This emotional factor also plays a
large part in securing acceptation.

So far as one can see, the acceptation or rejection of an idea by the
Unconscious depends on the associations with which it is connected.
Thus, an idea is accepted when it evokes similar ideas charged with
emotion of the same quality.  It is rejected when it is associated with
contrary ideas, which are, therefore, contrary in their emotional
charge.  In the latter case, the original idea is neutralised by its
associations, somewhat in the same way as an acid is neutralised by an
alkali.  An example will serve to make this clearer.

You are on a cross-channel boat on a roughish passage.  You go up to a
sailor and say to him in a sympathetic tone: "My dear fellow, you're
looking very ill.  Aren't you going to be sea-sick?"  According to his
temperament he either laughs at your "joke" or expresses a pardonable
irritation.  But he does not become sick because the associations
called up are contrary ones.  Sea-sickness is associated in his mind
with his own immunity from it, and therefore evokes not fear but
self-confidence.  Pursuing your somewhat inhumane experiment you
approach a timid-looking passenger.  "My dear sir, how ill you look!  I
feel sure you are going to be sea-sick.  Let me help you down below."
He turns pale.  The word "sea-sickness" associates itself with his own
fears and forebodings.  He accepts your aid down to his berth and there
the pernicious autosuggestion is realised.  In the first case the idea
was refused, because it was overwhelmed by a contrary association; in
the second the Unconscious accepted it, since it was reinforced by
similar ideas from within.

But supposing to a sick mind, permeated with thoughts of disease, a
thought of health is presented.  How can we avoid the malassociation
which tends to neutralise it?

We can think of the Unconscious as a tide which ebbs and flows.  In
sleep it seems to submerge the conscious altogether, while at our
moments of full wakefulness, when the attention and will are both at
work, the tide is at its lowest ebb.  Between these two extremes are
any number of intermediary levels.  When we are drowsy, dreamy, lulled
into a gentle reverie by music or by a picture or a poem, the
Unconscious tide is high; the more wakeful and alert we become the
lower it sinks.  This submersion of the conscious mind is called by
Baudouin the "Outcropping of the Subconscious."  The highest degree of
outcropping, compatible with the conscious direction of our thoughts,
occurs just before we fall asleep and just after we wake.

It is fairly obvious that the greater the outcropping the more
accessible these dynamic strata of the mind become, and the easier it
is to implant there any idea we wish to realise.

As the Unconscious tide rises the active levels of the mind are
overflowed; thought is released from its task of serving our conscious
aims in the real world of matter, and moves among the more primal
wishes and desires which people the Unconscious, like a diver walking
the strange world beneath the sea.  But the laws by which thought is
governed on this sub-surface level are not those of our ordinary waking
consciousness.  During outcropping association by contraries does not
seem readily to take place.  Thus the mal-association, which
neutralised the desired idea and so prevented acceptation, no longer
presents itself.  We all know what happens during a "day-dream" or
"brown-study," when the Unconscious tide is high.  A succession of
bright images glides smoothly through the mind.  The original thought
spins itself on and on; no obstacles seem to stop it, no questions of
probability arise; we are cut off from the actual conditions of life
and live in a world where all things are possible.  These day-dreams
cause very potent autosuggestions, and one should take care that they
are wholesome and innocent; but the important point is that on this
level of consciousness association seems to operate by similarity, and
emotion is comparatively intense.  These conditions are highly
favourable to acceptation.

If, on getting into bed at night, we assume a comfortable posture,
relax our muscles and close our eyes, we fall naturally into a stage of
semi-consciousness akin to that of day-dreaming.  If now we introduce
into the mind any desired idea, it is freed from the inhibiting
associations of daily life, associates itself by similarity, and
attracts emotion of the same quality as its own charge.  The
Unconscious is thus caused to accept it, and inevitably it is turned
into an autosuggestion.  Every time we repeat this process the
associative power of the idea is increased, its emotional value grows
greater, and the autosuggestion resulting from it is more powerful.  By
this means we can induce the Unconscious to accept an idea, the normal
associations of which are contrary and unfavourable.  The person with a
disease-soaked mind can gradually implant ideas of health, filling his
Unconscious daily with healing thoughts.  The instrument we use is
Thought, and the condition essential to success is that the conscious
mind shall be lulled to rest.

Systems which hitherto have tried to make use of autosuggestion have
failed to secure reliable results because they did not place their
reliance on Thought, but tried to compel the Unconscious to accept an
idea by exercising the Will.  Obviously, such attempts are doomed to
failure.  By using the will we automatically wake ourselves up,
suppress the encroaching tide of the Unconscious, and thereby destroy
the condition by which alone we can succeed.

It is worth our while to note more closely how this happens.  A
sufferer, whose mind is filled with thoughts of ill-health, sits down
to compel himself to accept a good suggestion.  He calls up a thought
of health and makes an effort of the will to impress it on the
Unconscious.  This effort restores him to full wakefulness and so
evokes the customary association--disease.  Consequently, he finds
himself contemplating the exact opposite of what he desired.  He
summons his will again and recalls the healthful thought, but since he
is now wider awake than ever, association is even more rapid and
powerful than before.  The disease-thought is now in full possession of
his mind and all the efforts of his will fail to dislodge it.  Indeed
the harder he struggles the more fully the evil thought possesses him.

This gives us a glimpse of the new and startling discovery to which
Coue's uniform success is due; namely, that when the will is in
conflict with an idea, the idea invariably gains the day.  This is
true, of course, not only of Induced Autosuggestion, but also of the
spontaneous suggestions which occur in daily life.  A few examples will
make this clear.

Most of us know how, when we have some difficult duty to perform, a
chance word of discouragement will dwell in the mind, eating away our
self-confidence and attuning our minds to failure.  All the efforts of
our will fail to throw it off; indeed, the more we struggle against it
the more we become obsessed with it.

Very similar to this is the state of mind of the person suffering from
stage-fright.  He is obsessed with ideas of failure and all the efforts
of his will are powerless to overcome them.  Indeed, it is the state of
effort and tension which makes his discomfiture so complete.

Sport offers many examples of the working of this law.

A tennis-player is engaged to play in an important match.  He wishes,
of course, to win, but fears that he will lose.  Even before the day of
the game his fears begin to realise themselves.  He is nervy and "out
of sorts."  In fact, the Unconscious is creating the conditions best
suited to realise the thought in his mind--failure.  When the game
begins his skill seems to have deserted him.  He summons the resources
of his will and tries to compel himself to play well, straining every
nerve to recapture the old dexterity.  But all his efforts only make
him play worse and worse.  The harder he tries the more signally he
fails.  The energy he calls up obeys not his will but the idea in his
mind, not the desire to win but the dominant thought of failure.

The fatal attraction of the bunker for the nervous golfer is due to the
same cause.  With his mind's eye he sees his ball alighting in the most
unfavourable spot.  He may use any club he likes, he may make a long
drive or a short; as long as the thought of the bunker dominates his
mind, the ball will inevitably find its way into it.  The more he calls
on his will to help him, the worse his plight is likely to be.  Success
is not gained by effort but by right thinking.  The champion golfer or
tennis-player is not a person of herculean frame and immense
will-power.  His whole life has been dominated by the thought of
success in the game at which he excels.

Young persons sitting for an examination sometimes undergo this painful
experience.  On reading through their papers they find that all their
knowledge has suddenly deserted them.  Their mind is an appalling blank
and not one relevant thought can they recall.  The more they grit their
teeth and summon the powers of the will, the further the desired ideas
flee.  But when they have left the examination-room and the tension
relaxes, the ideas they were seeking flow tantalisingly back into the
mind.  Their forgetfulness was due to thoughts of failure previously
nourished in the mind.  The application of the will only made the
disaster more complete.

This explains the baffling experience of the drug-taker, the drunkard,
the victim of some vicious craving.  His mind is obsessed by the desire
for satisfaction.  The efforts of the will to restrain it only make it
more overmastering.  Repeated failures convince him at length that he
is powerless to control himself, and this idea, operating as an
autosuggestion, increases his impotence.  So in despair, he abandons
himself to his obsession, and his life ends in wreckage.

We can now see, not only that the Will is incapable of vanquishing a
thought, but that as fast as the Will brings up its big guns, Thought
captures them and turns them against it.

This truth, which Baudouin calls the Law of Reversed Effort, is thus
stated by Coue:

"_When the Imagination and the Will are in conflict the Imagination
invariably gains the day._"

"_In the conflict between the Will and the Imagination, the force of
the Imagination is in direct ratio to the square of the Will._"

The mathematical terms are used, of course, only metaphorically.

Thus the Will turns out to be, not the commanding monarch of life, as
many people would have it, but a blind Samson, capable either of
turning the mill or of pulling down the pillars.

Autosuggestion succeeds by avoiding conflict.  It replaces wrong
thought by right, literally applying in the sphere of science the
principle enunciated in the New Testament: "Resist not evil, but
overcome evil with good."

This doctrine is in no sense a negation of the will.  It simply puts it
in its right place, subordinates it to a higher power.  A moment's
reflection will suffice to show that the will cannot be more than the
servant of thought.  We are incapable of exercising the will unless the
imagination has first furnished it with a goal.  We cannot simply will,
we must will _something_, and that something exists in our minds as an
idea.  The will acts rightly when it is in harmony with the idea in the
mind.

But what happens when, in the smooth execution of our idea, we are
confronted with an obstacle?  This obstacle may exist outside us, as
did the golfer's bunker, but it must also exist as an idea in our minds
or we should not be aware of it.

As long as we allow this mental image to stay there, the efforts of our
will to overcome it only make it more irresistible.  We run our heads
against it like a goat butting a brick wall.  Indeed, in this way we
can magnify the smallest difficulty until it becomes insurmountable--we
can make mole-hills into mountains.  This is precisely what the
neurasthenic does.  The idea of a difficulty dwells unchanged in his
mind, and all his efforts to overcome it only increase its dimensions,
until it overpowers him and he faints in the effort to cross a street.

But as soon as we change the idea our troubles vanish.  By means of the
intellect we can substitute for the blank idea of the obstacle that of
the means to overcome it.  Immediately, the will is brought into
harmony again with thought, and we go forward to the triumphant
attainment of our end.  It may be that the means adopted consist of a
frontal attack, the overcoming of an obstacle by force.  But before we
bring this force into play, the mind must have approved it--must have
entertained the idea of its probable success.  We must, in fact, have
thought of the obstacle as already smashed down and flattened out by
our attack.  Otherwise, we should involve ourselves in the conflict
depicted above, and our force would be exhausted in a futile internal
battle.  In a frontal attack against an obstacle we use effort, and
effort, to be effective, must be approved by the reason and preceded,
to some extent, by the idea of success.

Thus, even in our dealings with the outside world, Thought is always
master of the will.  How much more so when our action is turned inward!
When practising autosuggestion we are living in the mind, where
thoughts are the only realities.  We can meet with no obstacle other
than that of Thought itself.  Obviously then, the frontal attack, the
exertion of effort, can never be admissible, for it sets the will and
the thought at once in opposition.  The turning of our thoughts from
the mere recognition of an obstacle to the idea of the means to
overcome it, is no longer a preliminary, as in the case of outward
action.  In itself it clears away the obstacle.  By procuring the right
idea our end is already attained.

In applying effort during the practice of Induced Autosuggestion, we
use in the world of mind an instrument fashioned for use in the world
of matter.  It is as if we tried to solve a mathematical problem by
mauling the book with a tin-opener.

For two reasons then, effort must never be allowed to intrude during
the practice of autosuggestion: first because it wakes us up and so
suppresses the tide of the Unconscious, secondly because it causes
conflict between Thought and the will.

One other interesting fact emerges from an examination of the foregoing
examples.  In each case we find that the idea which occupied the mind
was of a final state, an accomplished fact.  The golfer was thinking of
his ball dropping into the bunker, the tennis-player of his defeat, the
examinee of his failure.  In each case the Unconscious realised the
thought in its own way, chose inevitably the means best suited to
arrive at its end--the realisation of the idea.  In the case of the
golfer the most delicate physical adjustments were necessary.  Stance,
grip and swing all contributed their quota, but these physical
adjustments were performed unconsciously, the conscious mind being
unaware of them.  From this we see that we need not suggest the way in
which our aim is to be accomplished.  If we fill our minds with the
thought of the desired end, provided that end is possible, the
Unconscious will lead us to it by the easiest, most direct path.

Here we catch a glimpse of the truth behind what is called "luck."  We
are told that everything comes to him who waits, and this is literally
true, provided he waits in the right frame of mind.  Some men are
notoriously lucky in business; whatever they touch seems to "turn to
gold."  The secret of their success lies in the fact that they
confidently expect to succeed.  There is no need to go so far as the
writers of the school of "New Thought," and claim that suggestion can
set in motion transcendental laws outside man's own nature.  It is
quite clear that the man who expects success, of whatever kind it may
be, will unconsciously take up the right attitude to his environment;
will involuntarily close with fleeting opportunity, and by his inner
fitness command the circumstances without.

Man has often been likened to a ship navigating the seas of life.  Of
that ship the engine is the will and Thought is the helm.  If we are
being directed out of our true course it is worse than useless to call
for full steam ahead; our only hope lies in changing the direction of
the helm.




III

THE PRACTICE OF AUTOSUGGESTION



CHAPTER VI

GENERAL RULES

With our knowledge of the powerful effect which an idea produces, we
shall see the importance of exercising a more careful censorship over
the thoughts which enter our minds.  Thought is the legislative power
in our lives, just as the will is the executive.  We should not think
it wise to permit the inmates of prisons and asylums to occupy the
legislative posts in the state, yet when we harbour ideas of passion
and disease, we allow the criminals and lunatics of thought to usurp
the governing power in the commonwealth of our being.

In future, then, we shall seek ideas of health, success, and goodness;
we shall treat warily all depressing subjects of conversation, the
daily list of crimes and disasters which fill the newspapers, and those
novels, plays and films which harrow our feelings, without transmuting
by the magic of art the sadness into beauty.

This does not mean that we should be always self-consciously studying
ourselves, ready to nip the pernicious idea in the bud; nor yet that we
should adopt the ostrich's policy of sticking our heads in the sand and
declaring that disease and evil have no real existence.  The one leads
to egotism and the other to callousness.  Duty sometimes requires us to
give our attention to things in themselves evil and depressing.  The
demands of friendship and human sympathy are imperious, and we cannot
ignore them without moral loss.  But there is a positive and a negative
way of approaching such subjects.

Sympathy is too often regarded as a passive process by which we allow
ourselves to be infected by the gloom, the weakness, the mental
ill-health of other people.  This is sympathy perverted.  If a friend
is suffering from small-pox or scarlet fever you do not seek to prove
your sympathy by infecting yourself with his disease.  You would
recognize this to be a crime against the community.  Yet many people
submit themselves to infection by unhealthy ideas as if it were an act
of charity--part of their duty towards their neighbours.  In the same
way people deliver their minds to harrowing stories of famine and
pestilence, as if the mental depression thus produced were of some
value to the far-away victims.  This is obviously false--the only
result is to cause gloom and ill-health in the reader and so make him a
burden to his family.  That such disasters should be known is beyond
question, but we should react to them in the manner indicated in the
last chapter.  We should replace the blank recognition of the evil by
the quest of the means best suited to overcome it; then we can look
forward to an inspiring end and place the powers of our will in the
service of its attainment.

  Oh, human soul, as long as thou canst so,
  Set up a mark of everlasting light
  Above the heaving senses' ebb and flow ...
  Not with lost toil thou labourest through the night,
  Thou mak'st the heaven thou hop'st indeed thy home.


Autosuggestion, far from producing callousness, dictates the method and
supplies the means by which the truest sympathy can be practised.  In
every case our aim must be to remove the suffering as soon as possible,
and this is facilitated by refusing acceptation to the bad ideas and
maintaining our own mental and moral balance.

Whenever gloomy thoughts come to us, whether from without or within, we
should quietly transfer our attention to something brighter.  Even if
we are afflicted by some actual malady, we should keep our thought from
resting on it as far as we have the power to do so.  An organic disease
may be increased a hundredfold by allowing the mind to brood on it, for
in so doing we place at its disposal all the resources of our organism,
and direct our life-force to our own destruction.  On the other hand,
by denying it our attention and opposing it with curative
autosuggestions, we reduce its power to the minimum and should succeed
in overcoming it entirely.  Even in the most serious organic diseases
the element contributed by wrong thought is infinitely greater than
that which is purely physical.

There are times when temperamental failings, or the gravity of our
affliction, places our imagination beyond our ordinary control.  The
suggestion operates in spite of us; we do not seem to possess the power
to rid our minds of the adverse thought.  Under these conditions we
should never struggle to throw off the obsessing idea by force.  Our
exertions only bring into play the law of reversed effort, and we
flounder deeper into the slough.  Coue's technique, however, which will
be outlined in succeeding chapters, will give us the means of mastering
ourselves, even under the most trying conditions.

Of all the destructive suggestions we must learn to shun, none is more
dangerous than fear.  In fearing something the mind is not only
dwelling on a negative idea, but it is establishing the closest
personal connection between the idea and ourselves.  Moreover, the idea
is surrounded by an aura of emotion, which considerably intensifies its
effect.  Fear combines every element necessary to give to an
autosuggestion its maximum power.  But happily fear, too, is
susceptible to the controlling power of autosuggestion.  It is one of
the first things which a person cognisant of the means to be applied
should seek to eradicate from his mind.

For our own sakes, too, we should avoid dwelling on the faults and
frailties of our neighbours.  If ideas of selfishness, greed, vanity,
are continually before our minds there is great danger that we shall
subconsciously accept them, and so realise them in our own character.
The petty gossip and backbiting, so common in a small town, produce the
very faults they seem to condemn.  But by allowing our minds to rest
upon the virtues of our neighbours, we reproduce the same virtues in
ourselves.

But if we should avoid negative ideas for our own sakes, much more
should we do so for the sake of other people.  Gloomy and despondent
men and women are centres of mental contagion, damaging all with whom
they come in contact.  Sometimes such people seem involuntarily to
exert themselves to quench the cheerfulness of brighter natures, as if
their Unconscious strove to reduce all others to its own low level.
But even healthy, well-intentioned people scatter evil suggestions
broadcast, without the least suspicion of the harm they do.  Every time
we remark to an acquaintance that he is looking ill, we actually damage
his health; the effect may be extremely slight, but by repetition it
grows powerful.  A man who accepts in the course of a day fifteen or
twenty suggestions that he is ill, has gone a considerable part of the
way towards actual illness.  Similarly, when we thoughtlessly
commiserate with a friend on the difficulty of his daily work, or
represent it as irksome and uncongenial, we make it a little harder for
him to accomplish, and thereby slightly diminish his chances of success.

If we must supervise our speech in contact with adults, with children
we should exercise still greater foresight.  The child's Unconscious is
far more accessible than that of the adult; the selective power
exercised by the conscious mind is much feebler, and consequently the
impressions received realise themselves with greater power.  These
impressions are the material from which the child's growing life is
constructed, and if we supply faulty material the resultant structure
will be unstable.  Yet the most attentive and well-meaning mothers are
engaged daily in sowing the seeds of weakness in their children's
minds.  The little ones are constantly told they will take cold, will
be sick, will fall down, or will suffer some other misfortune.  The
more delicate the child's health, the more likely it is to be subjected
to adverse suggestions.  It is too often saturated with the idea of bad
health, and comes to look on disease as the normal state of existence
and health as exceptional.  The same is equally true of the child's
mental and moral upbringing.  How often do foolish parents tell their
children that they are naughty, disobedient, stupid, idle or vicious?
If these suggestions were accepted, which, thank Heaven, is not always
the case, the little ones would in very fact develop just these
qualities.  But even when no word is spoken, a look or a gesture can
initiate an undesirable autosuggestion.  The same child, visited by two
strangers, will immediately make friends with the one and avoid the
other.  Why is this?--Because the one carries with him a healthful
atmosphere, while the other sends out waves of irritability or gloom.

"Men imagine," says Emerson, "that they communicate their virtue or
vice only by overt actions, and do not see that virtue and vice emit a
breath every moment."

With children, above all, it is not sufficient to refrain from the
expression of negative ideas; we must avoid harbouring them altogether.
Unless we possess a bright positive mind the suggestions derived from
us will be of little value.

The idea is gaining ground that a great deal of what is called
hereditary disease is transmitted from parent to child, not physically
but mentally--that is to say, by means of adverse suggestions
continually renewed in the child's mind.  Thus if one of the parents
has a tendency to tuberculosis, the child often lives in an atmosphere
laden with tuberculous thoughts.  The little one is continually advised
to take care of its lungs, to keep its chest warm, to beware of colds,
etc., etc.  In other words, the idea is repeatedly presented to its
mind that it possesses second-rate lungs.  The realisation of these
ideas, the actual production of pulmonary tuberculosis is thus almost
assured.

But all this is no more than crystallised common-sense.  Everyone knows
that a cheerful mind suffuses health, while a gloomy one produces
conditions favourable to disease.  "A merry heart doeth good like a
medicine," says the writer of the Book of Proverbs, "but a broken
spirit drieth the bones."  But this knowledge, since it lacked a
scientific basis, has never been systematically applied.  We have
regarded our feelings far too much as _effects_ and not sufficiently as
_causes_.  We are happy because we are well; we do not recognise that
the process will work equally well in the reverse direction--that we
shall be well because we are happy.  Happiness is not only the result
of our conditions of life; it is also the creator of those conditions.
Autosuggestion lays weight upon this latter view.  Happiness must come
first.  It is only when the mind is ordered, balanced, filled with the
light of sweet and joyous thought, that it can work with its maximum
efficiency.  When we are habitually happy our powers and capabilities
come to their full blossom, and we are able to work with the utmost
effect on the shaping of what lies without.

Happiness, you say, cannot be ordered like a chop in a restaurant.
Like love, its very essence is freedom.  This is true; but like love,
it can be wooed and won.  It is a condition which everyone experiences
at some time in life.  It is native to the mind.  By the systematic
practice of Induced Autosuggestion we can make it, not a fleeting
visitant, but a regular tenant of the mind, which storms and stresses
from without cannot dislodge.  This idea of the indwelling happiness,
inwardly conditioned, is as ancient as thought.  By autosuggestion we
can realise it in our own lives.




CHAPTER VII

THE GENERAL FORMULA

We saw that an unskilled golfer, who imagines his ball is going to
alight in a bunker, unconsciously performs just those physical
movements needful to realise his idea in the actual.  In realising this
idea his Unconscious displays ingenuity and skill none the less
admirable because opposed to his desire.  From this and other examples
we concluded that if the mind dwells on the idea of an accomplished
fact, a realised state, the Unconscious will produce this state.  If
this is true of our spontaneous autosuggestions it is equally true of
the self-induced ones.

It follows that if we consistently think of happiness we become happy;
if we think of health we become healthy; if we think of goodness we
become good.  Whatever thought we continually think, provided it is
reasonable, tends to become an actual condition of our life.

Traditionally we rely too much on the conscious mind.  If a man suffers
from headaches he searches out, with the help of his physician, their
cause; discovers whether they come from his eyes, his digestion or his
nerves, and purchases the drugs best suited to repair the fault.  If he
wishes to improve a bad memory he practises one of the various methods
of memory-training.  If he is the victim of a pernicious habit he is
left to counter it by efforts of the will, which too often exhaust his
strength, undermine his self-respect, and only lead him deeper into the
mire.  How simple in comparison is the method of Induced
Autosuggestion!  He need merely think the end--a head free from pain, a
good memory, a mode of life in which his bad habit has no part, and
these states are gradually evolved without his being aware of the
operation performed by the Unconscious.

But even so, if each individual difficulty required a fresh
treatment--one for the headache, one for the memory, one for the bad
habit and so on--then the time needful to practise autosuggestion would
form a considerable part of our waking life.  Happily the researches of
the Nancy School have revealed a further simplification.  This is
obtained by the use of a general formula which sets before the mind the
idea of a daily improvement in every respect, mental, physical and
moral.

In the original French this formula runs as follows: "Tous les jours, a
tous points de vue, je vais de mieux en mieux."  The English version
which Coue considers most satisfactory is this: "_Day by day, in every
way, I'm getting better and better_."  This is very easy to say, the
youngest child can understand it, and it possesses a rudimentary
rhythm, which exerts a lulling effect on the mind and so aids in
calling up the Unconscious.  But if you are accustomed to any other
version, such as that recommended by the translators of Baudouin, it
would be better to continue to use it.  Religious minds who wish to
associate the formula with God's care and protection might do so after
this fashion: "Day by day, in every way, by the help of God, I'm
getting better and better."  It is possible that the attention of the
Unconscious will thus be turned to moral and spiritual improvements to
a greater extent than by the ordinary formula.

But this general formula possesses definite advantages other than mere
terseness and convenience.  The Unconscious, in its character of
surveyor over our mental and physical functions, knows far better than
the conscious the precise failings and weaknesses which have the
greatest need of attention.  The general formula supplies it with a
fund of healing, strengthening power, and leaves it to apply this at
the points where the need is most urgent.

It is a matter of common experience that people's ideals of manhood and
womanhood vary considerably.  The hardened materialist pictures
perfection solely in terms of wealth, the butterfly-woman wants little
but physical beauty, charm, and the qualities that attract.  The
sensitive man is apt to depreciate the powers he possesses and
exaggerate those he lacks; while his self-satisfied neighbour can see
no good in any virtues but his own.  It is quite conceivable that a
person left free to determine the nature of his autosuggestions by the
light of his conscious desire might use this power to realise a quality
not in itself admirable, or even one which, judged by higher standards,
appeared pernicious.  Even supposing that his choice was good he would
be in danger of over-developing a few characteristics to the detriment
of others and so destroying the balance of his personality.  The use of
the general formula guards against this.  It saves a man in spite of
himself.  It avoids the pitfalls into which the conscious mind may lead
us by appealing to a more competent authority.  Just as we leave the
distribution of our bodily food to the choice of the Unconscious, so we
may safely leave that of our mental food, our Induced Autosuggestions.

The fear that the universal use of this formula would have a
standardising effect, modifying its users to a uniform pattern, is
unfounded.  A rigid system of particular suggestions might tend towards
such a result, but the general formula leaves every mind free to unfold
and develop in the manner most natural to itself.  The eternal
diversity of men's minds can only be increased by the free impulse thus
administered.

We have previously seen that the Unconscious tide rises to its highest
point compatible with conscious thought just before sleep and just
after awaking, and that the suggestions formulated then are almost
assured acceptation.  It is these moments that we select for the
repetition of the formula.

But before we pass on to the precise method, a word of warning is
necessary.  Even the most superficial attempt to analyse intellectually
a living act is bound to make it appear complex and difficult.  So our
consideration of the processes of outcropping and acceptation has
inevitably invested them with a false appearance of difficulty.
Autosuggestion is above all things easy.  Its greatest enemy is effort.
The more simple and unforced the manner of its performance the more
potently and profoundly it works.  This is shown by the fact that its
most remarkable results have been secured by children and by simple
French peasants.

It is here that Coue's directions for the practice differ considerably
from those of Baudouin.  Coue insists upon its easiness, Baudouin
complicates it.  The four chapters devoted by the latter to
"relaxation," "collection," "contention," and "concentration," produce
in the reader an adverse suggestion of no mean power.  They leave the
impression that autosuggestion is a perplexing business which only the
greatest foresight and supervision can render successful.  Nothing
could be more calculated to throw the beginner off the track.

We have seen that Autosuggestion is a function of the mind which we
spontaneously perform every day of our lives.  The more our induced
autosuggestions approximate to this spontaneous prototype the more
potent they are likely to be.  Baudouin warns us against the danger of
setting the intellect to do the work of intuition, yet this is
precisely what he himself does.  A patient trying by his rules to
attain outcropping and implant therein an autosuggestion is so
vigilantly attentive to what he is doing that outcropping is rendered
almost impossible.  These artificial aids are, in Coue's opinion, not
only unnecessary but hindersome.  Autosuggestion succeeds when
Conscious and Unconscious co-operate in the acceptance of an idea.
Coue's long practice has shown that we must leave the Unconscious, as
senior partner in the concern, to bring about the right conditions in
its own way.  The fussy attempts of the intellect to dictate the method
of processes which lie outside its sphere will only produce conflict,
and so condemn our attempt to failure.  The directions given here are
amply sufficient, if conscientiously applied, to secure the fullest
benefits of which the method is capable.

Take a piece of string and tie in it twenty knots.  By this means you
can count with a minimum expenditure of attention, as a devout Catholic
counts his prayers on a rosary.  The number twenty has no intrinsic
virtue; it is merely adopted as a suitable round number.

On getting into bed close your eyes, relax your muscles and take up a
comfortable posture.  These are no more than the ordinary preliminaries
of slumber.  Now repeat twenty times, counting by means of the knots,
the general formula: "Day by day, in every way, I'm getting better and
better."

The words should be uttered aloud; that is, loud enough to be audible
to your own ears.  In this way the idea is reinforced by the movements
of lips and tongue and by the auditory impressions conveyed through the
ear.  Say it simply, without effort, like a child absently murmuring a
nursery rhyme.  Thus you avoid an appeal to the critical faculties of
the conscious which would lessen the outcropping.  When you have got
used to this exercise and can say it quite "unself-consciously," begin
to let your voice rise or fall--it does not matter which--on the phrase
"in every way."  This is perhaps the most important part of the
formula, and is thus given a gentle emphasis.  But at first do not
attempt this accentuation; it will only needlessly complicate and, by
requiring more conscious attention, may introduce effort.  Do not try
to think of what you are saying.  On the contrary, let the mind wander
whither it will; if it rests on the formula all the better, if it
strays elsewhere do not recall it.  As long as your repetition does not
come to a full-stop your mind-wandering will be less disturbing than
would be the effort to recall your thoughts.

Baudouin differs from Coue as to the manner in which the formula should
be repeated.  His advice is to say it "piously," with all the words
separately stressed.  No doubt it has its value when thus spoken, but
the attitude of mind to which the word "pious" can be applied is
unfortunately not habitual with everyone.  The average man in trying to
be "pious" might end by being merely artificial.  But the child still
exists in the most mature of men.  The "infantile" mode of repeating
the formula puts one in touch with deep levels of the Unconscious where
the child-mind still survives.  Coue's remarkable successes have been
obtained by this means, and Baudouin advances no cogent reason for
changing it.

These instructions no doubt fall somewhat short of our ideal of a
thought entirely occupying the mind.  But they are sufficient for a
beginning.  The sovereign rule is to make no effort, and if this is
observed you will intuitively fall into the right attitude.  This
process of Unconscious adaptation may be hastened by a simple
suggestion before beginning.  Say to yourself, "I shall repeat the
formula in such a manner as to secure its maximum effect."  This will
bring about the required conditions much more effectively than any
conscious exercise of thought.

On waking in the morning, before you rise, repeat the formula in
exactly the same manner.

Its regular repetition is the foundation stone of the Nancy method and
should never be neglected.  In times of health it may be regarded as an
envoy going before to clear the path of whatever evils may lurk in the
future.  But we must look on it chiefly as an educator, as a means of
leavening the mass of adverse spontaneous suggestions which clog the
Unconscious and rob our lives of their true significance.

Say it with faith.  When you have said it your conscious part of the
process is completed.  Leave the Unconscious to do its work
undisturbed.  Do not be anxious about it, continually scanning yourself
for signs of improvement.  The farmer does not turn over the clods
every morning to see if his seed is sprouting.  Once sown it is left
till the green blade appears.  So it should be with suggestion.  Sow
the seed, and be sure the Unconscious powers of the mind will bring it
to fruition, and all the sooner if your conscious ego is content to let
it rest.

_Say it with faith_!  You can only rob Induced Autosuggestion of its
power in one way--by believing that it is powerless.  If you believe
this it becomes ipso facto powerless for you.  The greater your faith
the more radical and the more rapid will be your results; though if you
have only sufficient faith to repeat the formula twenty times night and
morning the results will soon give you in your own person the proof you
desire, and facts and faith will go on mutually augmenting each other.

Faith reposes on reason and must have its grounds.  What grounds can we
adduce for faith in Induced Autosuggestion?  The examples of cures
already cited are outside your experience and you may be tempted to
pooh-pooh them.  The experiment of Chevreul's pendulum, however, will
show in a simple manner the power possessed by a thought to transform
itself into an action.

Take a piece of white paper and draw on it a circle of about five
inches' radius.  Draw two diameters _AB_ and _CD_ at right angles to
each other and intersecting at _O_.  The more distinctly the lines
stand out the better--they should be thickly drawn in black ink.  Now
take a lead pencil or a light ruler and tie to one end a piece of
cotton about eight inches long; to the lower end of the cotton fasten a
heavy metal button, of the sort used on a soldier's tunic.  Place the
paper on a table so that the diameter _AB_ seems to be horizontal and
_CD_ to be vertical, thus:

[Illustration: Autosuggestion diagram]

Stand upright before the table with your miniature fishing-rod held
firmly in both hands and the button suspended above the point _O_.
Take care not to press the elbows nervously against the sides.

Look at the line _AB_, think of it, follow it with your eyes from side
to side.  Presently the button will begin to swing along the line you
are thinking of.  The more your mind dwells easily upon the idea of the
line the greater this swing becomes.  Your efforts to _try_ to hold the
pendulum still, by bringing into action the law of reversed effort,
only make its oscillations more pronounced.

Now fix your eyes on the line _CD_.  The button will gradually change
the direction of its movement, taking up that of _CD_.  When you have
allowed it to swing thus for a few moments transfer your attention to
the circle, follow the circumference round and round with your eyes.
Once more the swinging button will follow you, adopting either a
clock-wise or a counter clock-wise direction according to your thought.
After a little practice you should produce a circular swing with a
diameter of at least eight inches; but your success will be directly
proportional to the exclusiveness of your thought and to your efforts
to hold the pencil still.

Lastly think of the point _O_.  Gradually the radius of the swing will
diminish until the button comes to rest.

Is it necessary to point out how these movements are caused?  Your
thought of the line, passing into the Unconscious, is there realised,
so that _without knowing it_ you execute with your hands the
imperceptible movements which set the button in motion.  The
Unconscious automatically realises your thought through the nerves and
muscles of your arms and hands.  What is this but Induced
Autosuggestion?

The first time you perform this little experiment it is best to be
alone.  This enables you to approach it quite objectively.




CHAPTER VIII

PARTICULAR SUGGESTIONS

The use of particular suggestions outlined in this chapter is of minor
importance compared with that of the general formula--"Day by day, in
every way, I'm getting better and better."  The more deeply Coue
pursues his investigations, the more fully he becomes convinced that
all else is secondary to this.  It is not difficult to make a guess as
to why this should be.  In the general formula the attention is fully
absorbed by the idea of betterment.  The mind is directed away from all
that hinders and impedes and fixed on a positive goal.  In formulating
particular suggestions, however, we are always skating on the thin ice
round our faults and ailments, always touching on subjects which have
the most painful associations.  So that our ideas have not the same
creative positiveness.  However that may be, it is a matter of
experience that the general formula is the basis of the whole method,
and that all else is merely an adjuvant, an auxiliary--useful, but
inessential to the main object.

We have seen that a partial outcropping of the Unconscious takes place
whenever we relax our mental and physical control, and let the mind
wander; in popular language, when we fall into a "brown study" or a
"day-dream."  This outcropping should be sought before the special
suggestions are formulated.

But again we must beware of making simple things seem hard.  Baudouin
would have us perform a number of elaborate preparatives, which,
however valuable to the student of psychology, serve with the layman
only to distract the mind, and by fixing the attention on the mechanism
impair the power of the creative idea.  Moreover, they cause the
subject to exert efforts to attain a state the very essence of which is
effortlessness, like the victim of insomnia who "tries his hardest" to
fall asleep.

In order to formulate particular suggestions, go to a room where you
will be free from interruption, sit down in a comfortable chair, close
your eyes, and let your muscles relax.  In other words, act precisely
as if you were going to take a siesta.  In doing so you allow the
Unconscious tide to rise to a sufficient height to make your particular
suggestions effective.  Now call up the desired ideas through the
medium of speech.  Tell yourself that such and such ameliorations are
going to occur.

But here we must give a few hints as to the _form_ these suggestions
should take.

We should never set our faith a greater task than it can accomplish.  A
patient suffering from deafness would be ill-advised to make the
suggestion: "I can hear perfectly."  In the partial state of
outcropping association is not entirely cut off, and such an idea would
certainly call up its contrary.  Thus we should initiate a suggestion
antagonistic to the one we desired.  In this way we only court
disappointment and by losing faith in our instrument rob it of its
efficacy.

Further, we should avoid as far as possible all mention of the ailment
or difficulty against which the suggestion is aimed.  Indeed, our own
attention should be directed not so much to getting rid of wrong
conditions as to cultivating the opposite right ones in their place.
If you are inclined to be neurasthenic your mind is frequently occupied
with fear.  This fear haunts you because some thwarted element in your
personality, surviving in the Unconscious, gains through it a perverse
satisfaction.  In other words, your Unconscious enjoys the morbid
emotional condition which fear brings with it.  Should you succeed in
banishing your fears you would probably feel dissatisfied, life would
seem empty.  The old ideas would beckon you with promises, not of
happiness truly, but of emotion and excitement.  But if your
suggestions take a positive form, if you fill your mind with thoughts
of self-confidence, courage, outward activity, and interest in the
glowing and vital things of life, the morbid ideas will be turned out
of doors and there will be no vacant spot to which they can return.

Whatever the disorder may be, we should refer to it as little as
possible, letting the whole attention go out to the contrary state of
health.  We must dwell on the "Yes-idea," affirming with faith the
realisation of our hopes, seeing ourselves endowed with the triumphant
qualities we lack.  For a similar reason we should never employ a form
of words which connotes doubt.  The phrases, "I should like to," "I am
going to try," if realised by the Unconscious, can only produce a state
of longing or desire, very different from the actual physical and
mental modifications we are seeking.

Finally, we should not speak of the desired improvement entirely as a
thing of the future.  We should affirm that the change has already
begun, and will continue to operate more and more rapidly until our end
is fully attained.

Here are a few examples of special suggestions which may prove useful.

For deafness: Having closed the eyes and relaxed body and mind, say to
yourself something of this nature: "From this day forth my hearing will
gradually improve.  Each day I shall hear a little better.  Gradually
this improvement will become more and more rapid until, in a
comparatively short space of time, I shall hear quite well and I shall
continue to do so until the end of my life."

A person suffering from unfounded fears and forebodings might proceed
as follows: "From to-day onward I shall become more and more conscious
of all that is happy, positive and cheerful.  The thoughts which enter
my mind will be strong and healthful ones.  I shall gain daily in
self-confidence, shall believe in my own powers, which indeed at the
same time will manifest themselves in greater strength.  My life is
growing smoother, easier, brighter.  These changes become from day to
day more profound; in a short space of time I shall have risen to a new
plane of life, and all the troubles which used to perplex me will have
vanished and will never return."

A bad memory might be treated in some such terms as these: "My memory
from to-day on will improve in every department.  The impressions
received will be clearer and more definite; I shall retain them
automatically and without any effort on my part, and when I wish to
recall them they will immediately present themselves in their correct
form to my mind.  This improvement will be accomplished rapidly, and
very soon my memory will be better than it has ever been before."

Irritability and bad temper are very susceptible to autosuggestion and
might be thus treated: "Henceforth I shall daily grow more
good-humoured.  Equanimity and cheerfulness will become my normal
states of mind, and in a short time all the little happenings of life
will be received in this spirit.  I shall be a centre of cheer and
helpfulness to those about me, infecting them with my own good humour,
and this cheerful mood will become so habitual that nothing can rob me
of it."

Asthma is a disease which has always baffled and still baffles the
ordinary methods of medicine.  It has shown itself, however, in Coue's
experience, pre-eminently susceptible to autosuggestive treatment.
Particular suggestions for its removal might take this form: "From this
day forward my breathing will become rapidly easier.  Quite without my
knowledge, and without any effort on my part, my organism will do all
that is necessary to restore perfect health to my lungs and bronchial
passages.  I shall be able to undergo any exertion without
inconvenience.  My breathing will be free, deep, delightful.  I shall
draw in all the pure health-giving air I need, and thus my whole system
will be invigorated and strengthened.  Moreover, I shall sleep calmly
and peacefully, with the maximum of refreshment and repose, so that I
awake cheerful and looking forward with pleasure to the day's tasks.
This process has this day begun and in a short time I shall be wholly
and permanently restored to health."

It will be noticed that each of these suggestions comprises three
stages: (1) Immediate commencement of the amelioration.  (2) Rapid
progress.  (3) Complete and permanent cure.  While this scheme is not
essential, it is a convenient one and should be utilised whenever
applicable.  The examples are framed as the first autosuggestions of
persons new to the method.  On succeeding occasions the phrase "from
this day forth," or its variants, should be replaced by a statement
that the amelioration has already begun.  Thus, in the case of the
asthmatic, "My breathing is already becoming easier," etc.

Particular suggestions, though subsidiary in value to the general
formula, are at times of very great service.  The general formula looks
after the foundations of our life, building in the depths where eye
cannot see or ear hear.  Particular suggestions are useful on the
surface.  By their means we can deal with individual difficulties as
they arise.  The two methods are complementary.

Particular suggestions prove very valuable in reinforcing and rendering
permanent the effects obtained by the technique for overcoming pain,
which will be outlined in the next chapter.  Before commencing the
attack we should sit down, close our eyes and say calmly and
confidently to ourselves: "I am now going to rid myself of this pain."
When the desired result has been obtained, we should suggest that the
state of ease and painlessness now re-established will be permanent,
that the affected part will rapidly be toned up into a condition of
normal health, and will remain always in that desirable state.  Should
we have obtained only a lessening of the trouble without its complete
removal our suggestion should take this form: "I have obtained a
considerable degree of relief, and in the next few minutes it will
become complete.  I shall be restored to my normal condition of health
and shall continue so for the future."  Thus our assault upon the pain
is made under the best conditions, and should in every case prove
successful.

We should employ particular suggestions also for overcoming the
difficulties which confront us from time to time in our daily lives,
and for securing the full success of any task we take in hand.  The use
of the general suggestion will gradually strengthen our
self-confidence, until we shall expect success in any enterprise of
which the reason approves.  But until this consummation is reached,
until our balance of self-confidence is adequate for all our needs, we
can obtain an overdraft for immediate use by means of particular
suggestion.

We have already seen that the dimensions of any obstacle depend at
least as much upon our mental attitude towards it as upon its intrinsic
difficulty.  The neurasthenic, who imagines he cannot rise from his
bed, cannot do so because this simple operation is endowed by his mind
with immense difficulty.  The great mass of normal people commit the
same fault in a less degree.  Their energy is expended partly in doing
their daily work, and partly in overcoming the resistance in their own
minds.  By the action of the law of reversed effort the negative idea
they foster frequently brings their efforts to naught, and the very
exertions they make condemn their activities to failure.

For this reason it is necessary, before undertaking any task which
seems to us difficult, to suggest that it is in fact easy.  We close
our eyes and say quietly to ourselves, "The work I have to do is easy,
quite easy.  Since it is easy I can do it, and I shall do it
efficiently and successfully.  Moreover, I shall enjoy doing it; it
will give me pleasure, my whole personality will apply itself
harmoniously to the task, and the results will be even beyond my
expectation."  We should dwell on these ideas, repeating them
tranquilly and effortlessly.  Soon our mind will become serene, full of
hope and confidence.  Then we can begin to think out our method of
procedure, to let the mind dwell on the means best suited to attain our
object.  Since the impediments created by fear and anxiety are now
removed our ideas will flow freely, our plans will construct themselves
in the quiet of the mind, and we shall come to the actual work with a
creative vigour and singleness of purpose.

By a similar procedure the problems of conduct which defy solution by
conscious thought will frequently yield to autosuggestion.  When we are
"at our wits' ends," as the saying goes, to discover the best path out
of a dilemma, when choice between conflicting possibilities seems
impossible, it is worse than useless to continue the struggle.  The law
of reversed effort is at work paralysing our mental faculties.  We
should put it aside, let the waves of effort subside, and suggest to
ourselves that at a particular point of time the solution will come to
us of its own accord.  If we can conveniently do so, it is well to let
a period of sleep intervene, to suggest that the solution will come to
us on the morrow; for during sleep the Unconscious is left undisturbed
to realise in its own way the end we have consciously set before it.

This operation often takes place spontaneously, as when a problem left
unsolved the night before yields its solution apparently by an
inspiration when we arise in the morning.  "Sleep on it" still remains
the best counsel for those in perplexity, but they should preface their
slumbers by the positive autosuggestion that on waking they will find
the difficulty resolved.  In this connection it is interesting to note
that autosuggestion is already widely made use of as a means of waking
at a particular hour.  A person who falls asleep with the idea in his
mind of the time at which he wishes to wake, will wake at that time.
It may be added that wherever sleep is utilised for the realisation of
particular suggestions, these suggestions should be made in addition to
the general formula, either immediately before or immediately after;
they should never be substituted for it.

With some afflictions, such as fits, the attack is often so sudden and
unexpected that the patient is smitten down before he has a chance to
defend himself.  Particular suggestions should be aimed first of all at
securing due warning of the approaching attack.  We should employ such
terms as these: "In future I shall always know well in advance when a
fit is coming on.  I shall be amply warned of its approach.  When these
warnings occur I shall feel no fear or anxiety.  I shall be quite
confident of my power to avert it."  As soon as the warning comes--as
it will come, quite unmistakably--the sufferer should isolate himself
and use a particular suggestion to prevent the fit from developing.  He
should first suggest calm and self-control, then affirm repeatedly, but
of course without effort, that the normal state of health is
reasserting itself, that the mind is fully under control, and that
nothing can disturb its balance.  All sudden paroxysms, liable to take
us unexpectedly, should be treated by the same method, which in Coue's
experience has amply justified itself.

Nervous troubles and violent emotions, such as fear and anger, often
express themselves by physical movements.  Fear may cause trembling,
palpitation, chattering of the teeth; anger a violent clenching of the
fists.  Baudouin advises that particular suggestions in these cases
should be directed rather against the motor expression than against the
psychic cause, that our aim should be to cultivate a state of physical
impassibility.  But since a positive suggestion possesses greater force
than a negative, it would seem better to attack simultaneously both the
cause and the effect.  Instead of anger, suggest that you will feel
sympathy, patience, good-humour, and consequently that your bodily
state will be easy and unconstrained.

A form of particular suggestion which possesses distinct advantages of
its own is the quiet repetition of a single word.  If your mind is
distracted and confused, sit down, close your eyes, and murmur slowly
and reflectively the single word "Calm."  Say it reverently, drawing it
out to its full length and pausing after each repetition.  Gradually
your mind will be stilled and quietened, and you will be filled with a
sense of harmony and peace.  This method seems most applicable to the
attainment of moral qualities.  An evil passion can be quelled by the
use of the word denoting the contrary virtue.  The power of the word
depends largely upon its aesthetic and moral associations.  Words like
joy, strength, love, purity, denoting the highest ideals of the human
mind, possess great potency and are capable, thus used, of dispelling
mental states in which their opposites predominate.  The name
Reflective Suggestion, which Baudouin applies indifferently to all
autosuggestions induced by the subject's own choice, might well be
reserved for this specific form of particular suggestion.

The field for the exercise of particular suggestions is practically
limitless.  Whenever you feel a need for betterment, of whatever nature
it may be, a particular suggestion will help you.  But it must once
more be repeated that these particular suggestions are merely aids and
auxiliaries, which may, if leisure is scant, be neglected.




CHAPTER IX

HOW TO DEAL WITH PAIN

Pain, whether of mind or body, introduces a new element for which we
have hitherto made no provision.  By monopolising the attention it
keeps the conscious mind fully alert and so prevents one from attaining
the measure of outcropping needful to initiate successfully an
autosuggestion.  Thus if we introduce the "no-pain" idea into the
conscious, it is overwhelmed by its contrary--pain, and the patient's
condition becomes, if anything, worse.

To overcome this difficulty quite a new method is required.  If we
speak a thought, that thought, while we speak it, must occupy our
minds.  We could not speak it unless we thought it.  By continually
repeating "I have no pain" the sufferer constantly renews that thought
in his mind.  Unfortunately, after each repetition the pain-thought
insinuates itself, so that the mind oscillates between "I have no pain"
and "I have some pain," or "I have a bad pain."  But if we repeat our
phrase so rapidly that the contrary association has no time to insert
itself, we compel the mind willy-nilly to dwell on it.  Thus by a fresh
path we reach the same goal as that attained by induced outcropping; we
cause an idea to remain in occupation of the mind without calling up a
contrary association.  This we found to be the prime condition of
acceptation, and in fact by this means we can compel the Unconscious to
realise the "no-pain" thought and so put an end to the pain.

But the sentence "I have no pain" does not lend itself to rapid
repetition.  The physical difficulties are too great; the tongue and
lips become entangled in the syllables and we have to stop to restore
order.  Even if we were dexterous enough to articulate the words
successfully, we should only meet with a new difficulty.  The most
emphatic word in the phrase is "pain"; involuntarily we should find
ourself stressing this word with particular force, so strengthening in
our minds the very idea we are trying to dislodge.

We shall do best to copy as closely as we can Coue's own procedure.
The phrase he uses, "ca passe," makes no mention of the hurt; it is
extremely easy to say, and it produces an unbroken stream of sound,
like the whirr of a machine or the magnified buzz of an insect, which,
as it were, carries the mind off its feet.  The phrase recommended by
Baudouin, "It is passing off," produces no such effect, and in fact
defies all our attempts to repeat it quickly.  On the whole, the most
suitable English version seems to be "It's going."  Only the word
"going" should be repeated, and the treatment should conclude with the
emphatic statement "gone!"  The word "going," rapidly gabbled, gives
the impression of a mechanical drill, biting its way irresistibly into
some hard substance.  We can think of it as drilling the desired
thought into the mind.

If you are suffering from any severe pain, such as toothache or
headache, sit down, close your eyes and assure yourself calmly that you
are going to get rid of it.  Now gently stroke with your hand the
affected part and repeat at the same time as fast as you can, producing
a continuous stream of sound, the words: "It's going, going, going ...
gone!"  Keep it up for about a minute, pausing only to take a deep
breath when necessary, and using the word "gone" only at the conclusion
of the whole proceeding.  At the end of this time the pain will either
have entirely ceased or at least sensibly abated.  In either case apply
the particular suggestions recommended in the previous chapter.  If the
pain has ceased suggest that it will not return; if it has only
diminished suggest that it will shortly pass away altogether.  Now
return to whatever employment you were engaged in when the pain began.
Let other interests occupy your attention.  If in a reasonable space,
say half an hour, the pain still troubles you, isolate yourself again;
suggest once more that you are going to master it, and repeat the
procedure.

It is no exaggeration to say that by this process any pain can be
conquered.  It may be, in extreme cases, that you will have to return
several times to the attack.  This will generally occur when you have
been foolish enough to supply the pain with a cause--a decayed tooth, a
draught of cold air, etc.--and so justify it to your reason, and give
it, so to speak, an intellectual sanction.  Or it may be that it will
cease only to return again.  But do not be discouraged; attack it
firmly and you are bound to succeed.

The same procedure is equally effective with distressing states of
mind, worry, fear, despondency.  In such cases the stroking movement of
the hand should be applied to the forehead.

Even in this exercise no more effort should be used than is necessary.
Simply repeat rapidly the word which informs you that the trouble is
going, and let this, with the stroking movement of the hand, which, as
it were, fixes the attention to that particular spot, be the sum and
substance of your effort.  With practice it will become easier, you
will "drop into it"; that is to say, the Unconscious will perform the
adaptations necessary to make it more effective.  After a time you
should be able to obtain relief in twenty to twenty-five seconds.  But
the effect is still more far-reaching; you will be delivered from the
fear of pain.  Regarding yourself as its master, you will be able with
the mere threat of treatment to prevent it from developing.  You will
hang up a card, "No admittance," on the doors of your conscious mind.

It may be that the pain attacks you in the street or in a workshop; in
some public place where the audible repetition of the phrase would
attract attention.  In that case it is best to close the eyes for a
moment and formulate this particular suggestion: "I shall not add to
this trouble by thinking about it; my mind will be occupied by other
things; but on the first opportunity I shall make it pass away," Then
as soon as you can conveniently do so make use of the phrase "It's
going."  When you have become expert in the use of this form of
suggestion you will be able to exorcise the trouble by repeating the
phrase mentally--at any rate if the words are outlined with the lips
and tongue.  But the beginner should rely for a time entirely on
audible treatment.  By dropping it too soon he will only court
disappointment.

It sometimes happens that a patient is so prostrated by pain or misery
that he has not the energy to undertake even the repetition of the word
"going."  The pain-thought so obsesses the mind that the state of
painlessness seems too remote even to contemplate.  Under these
circumstances it seems best to employ this strategy.  Lie down on a
bed, sofa, or arm-chair and relax both mind and body.  Cease from all
effort--which can only make things worse--and let the pain-thought have
its way.  After a time your energies will begin to collect themselves,
your mind to reassert its control.  Now make a firm suggestion of
success and apply the method.  Get another person to help you, as Coue
helps his patients, by performing the passes with the hand and
repeating the phrase with you.  By this means you can make quite sure
of success.  This seemingly contradictory proceeding is analogous to
that of the angler "playing" a fish.  He waits till it has run its
course before bringing his positive resources into play.

Baudouin recommends an analogous proceeding as a weapon against
insomnia.  The patient, he says, should rapidly repeat the phrase, "I
am going to sleep," letting his mind be swept away by a torrent of
words.  Once more the objection arises that the phrase "I am going to
sleep" is not such as we can rapidly repeat.  But even if we substitute
for it some simple phrase which can be easily articulated it is
doubtful whether it will succeed in more than a small percentage of
cases.  Success is more likely to attend us if we avail ourselves of
the method of reflective repetition mentioned in the last chapter.  We
should take up the position most favourable to slumber and then repeat
slowly and contemplatively the word "Sleep."  The more impersonal our
attitude towards the idea the more rapidly it will be realised in our
own slumbers.




CHAPTER X

AUTOSUGGESTION AND THE CHILD

In treating children it should be remembered that autosuggestion is
primarily not a remedy but a means of insuring healthy growth.  It
should not be reserved for times when the child is sick, but provided
daily, with the same regularity as meals.

Children grow up weakly not from lack of energy, but because of a waste
and misapplication of it.  The inner conflict, necessitated by the
continual process of adaptation which we call growth, is often of quite
unnecessary violence, not only making a great temporary demand on the
child's vital energy, but even locking it up in the Unconscious in the
form of "complexes," so that its future life is deprived of a portion
of its due vitality.  A wise use of autosuggestion will preclude these
disasters.  Growth will be ordered and controlled.  The necessary
conflicts will be brought to a successful issue, the unnecessary ones
avoided.

Autosuggestion may very well begin before the child is born.  It is a
matter of common knowledge that a mother must be shielded during
pregnancy from any experience involving shock or fright, since these
exert a harmful effect on the developing embryo, and may in extreme
cases result in abortion, or in physical deformity or mental weakness
in the child.  Instances of this ill-effect are comparatively common,
and the link between cause and effect is often unmistakable.  There is
no need to point out that these cases are nothing more than spontaneous
autosuggestions operating in the maternal Unconscious; since during
pregnancy the mother moulds her little one not only by the food she
eats but also by the thoughts she thinks.  The heightened emotionality
characteristic of this state bespeaks an increased tendency to
outcropping, and so an increased suggestibility.  Thus spontaneous
autosuggestions are far more potent than in the normal course of life.
But, happily, induced autosuggestions are aided by the same conditions,
so that the mother awake to her powers and duties can do as much good
as the ignorant may do harm.

Without going into debatable questions, such as the possibility of
predetermining the sex of the child to be born, one can find many
helpful ways of aiding and benefiting the growing life by
autosuggestive means.  The mother should avoid with more than ordinary
care all subjects, whether in reading or conversation, which bear on
evil in any form, and she should seek whatever uplifts the mind and
furnishes it with beautiful and joyous thought.  But the technical
methods of autosuggestion can also be brought into action.

The mother should suggest to herself that her organism is furnishing
the growing life with all it needs, and that the child will be strong
and healthy in mind, in body, and in character.

These suggestions should be in general terms bearing on qualities of
undoubted good, for obviously it is not desirable to define an
independent life too narrowly.  They need consist only of a few
sentences, and should be formulated night and morning immediately
before or after the general formula.  Furthermore, when the mother's
thoughts during the day stray to the subject of her child, she can take
this opportunity to repeat the whole or some part of the particular
suggestion she has chosen.  These few simple measures will amply
suffice.  Any undue tendency of the mind to dwell on the thought of the
child, even in the form of good suggestions, should not be encouraged.
A normal mental life is in itself the best of conditions for the
welfare of both mother and child.  For her own sake however the mother
might well suggest that the delivery will be painless and easy.

The only direct means of autosuggestion applicable to the child for
some months after birth is that of the caress, though it must be
remembered that the mental states of mother and nurse are already
stamping themselves on the little mind, forming it inevitably for
better or worse.  Should any specific trouble arise, the method of
Mlle. Kauffmant should be applied by the mother.  Taking the child on
her knee she should gently caress the affected part, thinking the while
of its reinstatement in perfect health.  It seems generally advisable
to express these thoughts in words.  Obviously, the words themselves
will mean nothing to an infant of two or three months, but they will
hold the mother's thought in the right channel, and this thought, by
the tone of her voice, the touch of her hand, will be communicated to
the child.  Whether telepathy plays any part in this process we need
not inquire, but the baby is psychically as well as physically so
dependent on the mother that her mental states are communicated by
means quite ineffective with adults.  Love in itself exerts a
suggestive power of the highest order.

When the child shows signs of understanding what is said to it, before
it begins itself to speak, the following method should be applied.
After the little one has fallen asleep at night the mother enters the
room, taking care not to awaken it, and stands about a yard from the
head of the cot.  She proceeds then to formulate in a whisper such
suggestions as seem necessary.  If the child is ailing the suggestion
might take the form of the phrase "You are getting better" repeated
twenty times.  If it is in health the general formula will suffice.
Particular suggestions may also be formulated bearing on the child's
health, character, intellectual development, etc.  These of course
should be in accordance with the instructions given in the chapter
devoted to particular suggestions.  On withdrawing, the mother should
again be careful not to awaken the little one.  Should it show signs of
waking, the whispered command "sleep," repeated several times, will
lull it again to rest.  Baudouin recommends that during these
suggestions the mother should lay her hand on the child's forehead.
The above, however, is the method preferred by Coue.

This nightly practice is the most effective means of conveying
autosuggestions to the child-mind.  It should be made a regular habit
which nothing is allowed to interrupt.  If for any reason the mother is
unable to perform it, her place may be taken by the father, the nurse,
or some relative.  But for obvious reasons the duty belongs by right to
the mother, and, when a few weeks' practice has revealed its beneficent
power, few mothers will be willing to delegate it to a less suitable
agent.

This practice, as stated above, may well begin before the child has
actually learned to speak, for its Unconscious will already be forming
a scheme more or less distinct of the significance of the sounds that
reach it, and will not fail to gather the general tenor of the words
spoken.  The date at which it should be discontinued is less easy to
specify.  Growth, to be healthy, must carry with it a gradual increase
in independence and self-sufficiency.  There seems to be some slight
danger that the practice of nightly suggestions, if continued too long,
might prolong unduly the state of dependence upon parental support.
Reliable indications on this point are furnished, however, by the child
itself.  As soon as it is able to face its daily problems for itself,
when it no longer runs to the parent for help and advice in every
little difficulty, the time will have arrived for the parental
suggestions to cease.

As soon as a child is able to speak it should be taught to repeat the
general formula night and morning in the same way as an adult.  Thus
when the time comes to discontinue the parent's suggestions their
effect will be carried on by those the child formulates itself.  There
is one thing more to add: in the case of boys it would seem better at
the age of seven or eight for the father to replace the mother in the
role of suggester, while the mother, of course, performs the office
throughout for her girls.  Should any signs appear that the period of
puberty is bringing with it undue difficulties or perils, the nightly
practice might be resumed in the form of particular suggestions bearing
on the specific difficulties.  It must be remembered, however, that the
child's sexual problem is essentially different from that of the adult,
and the suggestions must therefore be in the most general terms.  Here
as elsewhere the end alone should be suggested, the Unconscious being
left free to choose its own means.

As soon as the child has learnt to speak it should not be allowed to
suffer pain.  The best method to adopt is that practised by Coue in his
consultations.  Let the child close its eyes and repeat with the
parent, "It's going, going ... gone!" while the latter gently strokes
the affected part.  But as soon as possible the child should be
encouraged to overcome smaller difficulties for itself, until the
parent's help is eventually almost dispensed with.  This is a powerful
means of developing self-reliance and fostering the sense of
superiority to difficulties which will be invaluable in later life.

That children readily take to the practice is shown by these examples,
which are again quoted from letters received by Coue.

"Your youngest disciple is our little David.  The poor little chap had
an accident to-day.  Going up in the lift with his father, when quite
four feet up, he fell out on his head and on to a hard stone floor.  He
was badly bruised and shocked, and when put to bed lay still and kept
saying: 'ca passe, ca passe,' over and over again, and then looked up
and said, 'no, not gone away.'  To-night he said again 'ca passe' and
then added, 'nearly gone.'  So he is better."

  B. K. (London).
  8 _January_, 1922.


Another lady writes:

"Our cook's little niece, aged 23 months--the one we cured of
bronchitis--gave herself a horrid blow on the head yesterday.  Instead
of crying she began to smile, passed her hand over the place and said
sweetly, 'ca passe.'  Hasn't she been well brought up?"

All these methods are extremely simple and involve little expenditure
of time and none of money.  They have proved their efficacy over and
over again in Nancy, and there is no reason why a mother of average
intelligence and conscientiousness should not obtain equally good
results.  Naturally, first attempts will be a little awkward, but there
is no need for discouragement on that account.  Even supposing that
through the introduction of effort some slight harm were done--and the
chance is comparatively remote--this need cause no alarm.  The right
autosuggestion will soon counteract it and produce positive good in its
place.  But any mother who has practised autosuggestion for herself
will be able correctly to apply it to her child.

At first glance the procedure may seem revolutionary, but think it over
for a moment and you will see that it is as old as the hills.  It is
merely a systematisation on a scientific basis of the method mothers
have intuitively practised since the world began.  "Sleep, baby, sleep.
Angels are watching o'er thee,"--what is this but a particular
suggestion?  How does a wise mother proceed when her little one falls
and grazes its hand?  She says something of this kind: "Let me kiss it
and then it will be well."  She kisses it, and with her assurance that
the pain has gone the child runs happily back to its play.  This is
only a charming variation of the method of the caress.




CHAPTER XI

CONCLUSION

Induced Autosuggestion is not a substitute for medical practice.  It
will not make us live for ever, neither will it free us completely from
the common ills of life.  What it may do in the future, when all its
implications have been realised, all its resources exploited, we cannot
say.  There is no doubt that a generation brought up by its canons
would differ profoundly from the disease-ridden population of to-day.
But our immediate interest is with the present.

The adult of to-day carries in his Unconscious a memory clogged with a
mass of adverse suggestions which have been accumulating since
childhood.  The first task of Induced Autosuggestion will be to clear
away this mass of mental lumber.  Not until this has been accomplished
can the real man appear and the creative powers of autosuggestion begin
to manifest themselves.

By the use of this method each one of us should be able to look forward
to a life in which disease is a diminishing factor.  But how great a
part it will play depends upon the conditions we start from and the
regularity and correctness of our practice.  Should disease befall us
we possess within a potent means of expelling it, but this does not
invalidate the complementary method of destroying it from without.
Autosuggestion and the usual medical practice should go hand in hand,
each supplementing the other.  If you are ill, call in your doctor as
before, but enlist the resources of Induced Autosuggestion to reinforce
and extend his treatment.

In this connection it must be insisted on that autosuggestion should be
utilised for every ailment, whatever its nature, and whether its
inroads be grave or slight.  Every disease is either strengthened or
weakened by the action of the mind.  We cannot take up an attitude of
neutrality.  Either we must aid the disease to destroy us by allowing
our minds to dwell on it, or we must oppose it and destroy it by a
stream of healthful dynamic thought.  Too frequently we spontaneously
adopt the former course.

The general opinion that functional and nervous diseases alone are
susceptible to suggestive treatment is at variance with the facts.
During Coue's thirty years of practice, in which many thousands of
cases have been treated, he has found that organic troubles yield as
easily as functional, that bodily derangements are even easier to cure
than nervous and mental.  He makes no such distinctions; an illness is
an illness whatever its nature.  As such Coue attacks it, and in 98 per
cent. of cases he attains in greater or less degree a positive result.

Apart from the permanently insane, in whose minds the machinery of
autosuggestion is itself deranged, there are only two classes of
patient with whom Induced Autosuggestion seems to fail.  One consists
of persons whose intelligence is so low that the directions given are
never comprehended; the other of those who lack the power of voluntary
attention and cannot devote their minds to an idea even for a few
consecutive seconds.  These two classes, however, are numerically
insignificant, together making up not much more than 2 per cent. of the
population.

Autosuggestion is equally valuable as an aid to surgical practice.  A
broken bone--the sceptic's last resource--cannot of course be treated
by autosuggestion alone.  A surgeon must be called in to mend it.  But
when the limb has been rightly set and the necessary mechanical
precautions have been taken, autosuggestion will provide the best
possible conditions for recovery.  It can prevent lameness, stiffness,
unsightly deformity and the other evils which a broken limb is apt to
entail, and it will shorten considerably the normal period of
convalescence.

It is sometimes stated that the results obtained by autosuggestion are
not permanent.  This objection is really artificial, arising from the
fact that we ignore the true nature of autosuggestion and regard it
merely as a remedy.  When we employ autosuggestion to heal a malady our
aim is so to leaven the Unconscious with healthful thoughts, that not
only will that specific malady be excluded, but all others with it.
Autosuggestion should not only remove a particular form of disease, but
the tendency to all disease.

If after an ailment has been removed we allow our mind to revert to
unhealthy thoughts, they will tend to realise themselves in the same
way as any others, and we may again fall a victim to ill-health.  Our
sickness may take the same form as on the preceding occasion, or it may
not.  That will depend on the nature of our thought.  But by the
regular employment of the general formula we can prevent any such
recurrence.  Instead of reverting to unhealthy states of mind we shall
progressively strengthen the healthy and creative thought that has
already given us health, so that with each succeeding day our defence
will be more impenetrable.  Not only do we thus avoid a relapse into
former ailments but we clear out of our path those which lie in wait
for us in the future.

We saw that in the Nancy clinic some of the cures effected are almost
instantaneous.  It would be a mistake, however, to embark on the
practice of Induced Autosuggestion with the impression that we are
going to be miraculously healed in the space of a few days.  Granted
sufficient faith, such a result would undoubtedly ensue; nay, more, we
have records of quite a number of such cases, even where the help of a
second person has not been called in.  Here is an example.  A friend of
mine, M. Albert P., of Bordeaux, had suffered for more than ten years
with neuralgia of the face.  Hearing of Coue, he wrote to him, and
received instructions to repeat the general formula.  He did so, and on
the second day the neuralgia had vanished and has never since returned.
But such faith is not common.  Immediate cures are the exception, and
it will be safer for us to look forward to a gradual and progressive
improvement.  In this way we shall guard against disappointment.  It
may be added that Coue prefers the gradual cure, finding it more stable
and less likely to be disturbed by adverse conditions.

We should approach autosuggestion in the same reasonable manner as we
approach any other scientific discovery.  There is no hocus-pocus about
it, nor are any statements made here which experience cannot verify.
But the attitude we should beware most of is that of the intellectual
amateur, who makes the vital things of life small coin to exchange with
his neighbour of the dinner-table.  Like religion, autosuggestion is a
thing to practise.  A man may be conversant with all the creeds in
Christendom and be none the better for it; while some simple soul,
loving God and his fellows, may combine the high principles of
Christianity in his life without any acquaintance with theology.  So it
is with autosuggestion.

Autosuggestion is just as effective in the treatment of moral
delinquencies as in that of physical ills.  Drunkenness, kleptomania,
the drug habit, uncontrolled or perverted sexual desires, as well as
minor failings of character, are all susceptible to its action.  It is
as powerful in small things as in great.  By particular suggestions we
can modify our tastes.  We can acquire a relish for the dishes we
naturally dislike, and make disagreeable medicine taste pleasant.  So
encouraging has been its application to the field of morals that Coue
is trying to gain admittance to the French state reformatories.  So
far, the official dislike for innovations has proved a barrier, but
there is good reason to hope that in the near future the application of
this method to the treatment of the criminal will be greatly extended.

By way of anticipating an objection it may be stated that the Coue
method of Induced Autosuggestion is in no sense inferior to hypnotic
suggestion.  Coue himself began his career as a hypnotist, but being
dissatisfied with the results, set out in quest of a method more simple
and universal.  Conscious autosuggestion, apart from its convenience,
can boast one great advantage over its rival.  The effects of hypnotic
suggestion are often lost within a few hours of the treatment.  Whereas
by the use of the general formula the results of Induced Autosuggestion
go on progressively augmenting.

Here we touch again the question of the suggester.  We have already
seen that a suggester is not needed, that autosuggestion can yield its
fullest fruits to those who practise it unaided.  But some persons
cannot be prevailed on to accept this fact.  They feel a sense of
insufficiency; the mass of old wrong suggestions has risen so
mountain-high that they imagine themselves incapable of removing it.
With such the presence of a suggester is an undoubted help.  They have
nothing to do but lie passive and receive the ideas he evokes.  Even
so, however, they will get little good unless they consent to repeat
the general formula.

But as long as we look on autosuggestion as a remedy we miss its true
significance.  Primarily it is a means of self-culture, and one far
more potent than any we have hitherto possessed.  It enables us to
develop the mental qualities we lack: efficiency, judgment, creative
imagination, all that will help us to bring our life's enterprise to a
successful end.  Most of us are aware of thwarted abilities, powers
undeveloped, impulses checked in their growth.  These are present in
our Unconscious like trees in a forest, which, overshadowed by their
neighbours, are stunted for lack of air and sunshine.  By means of
autosuggestion we can supply them with the power needed for growth and
bring them to fruition in our conscious lives.  However old, however
infirm, however selfish, weak or vicious we may be, autosuggestion will
do something for us.  It gives us a new means of culture and discipline
by which the "accents immature," the "purposes unsure" can be nursed
into strength, and the evil impulses attacked at the root.  It is
essentially an individual practice, an individual attitude of mind.
Only a narrow view would split it up into categories, debating its
application to this thing or to that.  It touches our being in its
wholeness.  Below the fussy perturbed little ego, with its local
habitation, its name, its habits and views and oddities is an ocean of
power, as serene as the depths below the troubled surface of the sea.
Whatever is of you comes eventually thence, however perverted by the
prism of self-consciousness.  Autosuggestion is a channel by which the
tranquil powers of this ultimate being are raised to the level of our
life here and now.

What prospects does autosuggestion open to us in the future?

It teaches us that the burdens of life are, at least in large measure,
of our own creating.  We reproduce in ourselves and in our
circumstances the thoughts of our minds.  It goes further.  It offers
us a means by which we can change these thoughts when they are evil and
foster them when they are good, so producing a corresponding betterment
in our individual life.  But the process does not end with the
individual.  The thoughts of society are realised in social conditions,
the thoughts of humanity in world conditions.  What would be the
attitude towards our social and international problems of a generation
nurtured from infancy in the knowledge and practice of autosuggestion?
If fear and disease were banned from the individual life, could they
persist in the life of the nation?  If each person found happiness in
his own heart would the illusory greed for possession survive?  The
acceptance of autosuggestion entails a change of attitude, a
revaluation of life.  If we stand with our faces westward we see
nothing but clouds and darkness, yet by a simple turn of the head we
bring the wide panorama of the sunrise into view.

That Coue's discoveries may profoundly affect our educational methods
is beyond question.  Hitherto we have been dealing directly only with
the conscious mind, feeding it with information, grafting on to it
useful accomplishments.  What has been done for the development of
character has been incidental and secondary.  This was inevitable so
long as the Unconscious remained undiscovered, but now we have the
means of reaching profounder depths, of endowing the child not only
with reading and arithmetic, but with health, character and personality.

But perhaps it is in our treatment of the criminal that the greatest
revolution may be expected.  The acts for which he is immured result
from nothing more than twists and tangles of the threads of thought in
the Unconscious mind.  This is the view of eminent authorities.  But
autosuggestion takes us a long step further.  It shows how these
discords of character may be resolved.  Since Coue has succeeded in
restoring to moral health a youth of homicidal tendencies, why should
not the same method succeed with many of the outcasts who fill our
prisons?  At least the younger delinquents should prove susceptible.
But the idea underlying this attitude entails a revolution in our penal
procedure.  It means little less than this: that crime is a disease and
should be treated as such; that the idea of punishment must give place
to that of cure; the vindictive attitude to one of pity.  This brings
us near to the ideals of the New Testament, and indeed, autosuggestion,
as a force making for goodness, is bound to touch closely on religion.

It teaches the doctrine of the inner life which saints and sages have
proclaimed through all ages.  It asserts that within are the sources of
calm, of power and of courage, and that the man who has once attained
mastery of this inner sphere is secure in the face of all that may
befall him.  This truth is apparent in the lives of great men.  Martyrs
could sing at the stake because their eyes were turned within on the
vision of glory which filled their hearts.  Great achievements have
been wrought by men who had the fortitude to follow the directions of
an inner voice, even in contradiction to the massed voices they heard
without.

Suppose we find that the power Christ gave to his disciples to work
miracles of healing was not a gift conferred on a few selected
individuals, but was the heritage of all men; that the kingdom of
heaven within us to which He alluded was available in a simple way for
the purging and elevation of our common life, for procuring sounder
health and sweeter minds.  Is not the affirmation contained in Coue's
formula a kind of prayer?  Does it not appeal to something beyond the
self-life, to the infinite power lying behind us?

Autosuggestion is no substitute for religion; it is rather a new weapon
added to the religious armoury.  If as a mere scientific technique it
can yield such results, what might it not do as the expression of those
high yearnings for perfection which religion incorporates?











End of Project Gutenberg's The Practice of Autosuggestion, by C. Harry Brooks

##############################################################################
## THE LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA — Thomson Jay Hudson (1893) — suggestion theory, hypnotic phenomena, the subjective mind framework
##############################################################################

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Graeme Mackreth and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










THE LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA




BY DR. HUDSON.


  THE LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA. 12mo                      $1.50

  A SCIENTIFIC DEMONSTRATION OF THE FUTURE LIFE. 12mo      1.50

  THE DIVINE PEDIGREE OF MAN. 12mo                         1.50

  THE LAW OF MENTAL MEDICINE. 12mo                        $1.20 _net_

  THE EVOLUTION OF THE SOUL. 12mo                          1.20 _net_


A.C. MCCLURG & CO.

CHICAGO.




  THE LAW

  OF

  PSYCHIC PHENOMENA

  A Working Hypothesis

  FOR THE

  SYSTEMATIC STUDY OF HYPNOTISM,
  SPIRITISM, MENTAL THERAPEUTICS,
  ETC.

  BY

  THOMSON JAY HUDSON, PH.D., LL.D.

  AUTHOR OF "A SCIENTIFIC DEMONSTRATION OF THE FUTURE LIFE,"
  "THE DIVINE PEDIGREE OF MAN," ETC.

  [Illustration]

  SIXTIETH THOUSAND

  CHICAGO
  A.C. MCCLURG & CO.
  1904




  COPYRIGHT
  BY A.C. MCCLURG AND CO.
  A.D. 1893


  UNIVERSITY PRESS, JOHN WILSON
  AND SON � CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




TO THE

Honorable Lester L. Bond,

THE COMPANION OF MY YOUTH, THE STEADFAST FRIEND OF MY MANHOOD, MY
MENTOR ALWAYS,

THIS VOLUME IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED BY

  THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.


I do not expect this book to stand upon its literary merits; for if it
is unsound in principle, felicity of diction cannot save it, and if
sound, homeliness of expression cannot destroy it. My primary object
in offering it to the public is to assist in bringing Psychology
within the domain of the exact sciences. That this has never been
accomplished is owing to the fact that no successful attempt has been
made to formulate a working hypothesis sufficiently comprehensive to
embrace all psychic phenomena. It has, however, long been felt by the
ablest thinkers of our time that all psychic manifestations of the
human intellect, normal or abnormal, whether designated by the name
of mesmerism, hypnotism, somnambulism, trance, spiritism, demonology,
miracle, mental therapeutics, genius, or insanity, are in some way
related; and consequently, that they are to be referred to some general
principle or law, which, once understood, will simplify and correlate
the whole subject-matter, and possibly remove it from the domain of
the supernatural. The London Society for Psychical Research, whose
ramifications extend all over the civilized world, was organized for
the purpose of making a systematic search for that law. The Society
numbers among its membership many of the ablest scientists now living.
Its methods of investigation are purely scientific, and painstaking
to the last degree, and its field embraces all psychic phenomena. It
has already accumulated and verified a vast array of facts of the most
transcendent interest and importance. In the mean time a large number
of the ablest scientists of Europe and America have been pursuing
independent investigations in the phenomena of hypnotism. They too
have accumulated facts and discovered principles of vast importance,
especially in the field of mental therapeutics,--principles which also
throw a flood of light upon the general subject of Psychology.

This vast array of facts, thus accumulated and verified, and awaiting
scientific classification and analysis, would seem to justify at least
a tentative effort to apply to them the processes of induction, to the
end that the fundamental law of psychic phenomena may be discovered.

In the following pages I have attempted such a classification of
verified phenomena, accounts of which I find in the literature current
on the subject; and I have tentatively formulated a working hypothesis
for the systematic study of all classes of psychic phenomena. It
will be observed that I have availed myself largely of the labors of
others, instead of confining myself to experimental researches of my
own. I have done this for two reasons: _first_, that I might avoid the
accusation of having conducted a series of experiments for the purpose
of sustaining a pet theory of my own; and _second_, because I hold that
substantial progress cannot be made in science until one is ready to
accord due credit to human integrity, and to give due weight to human
testimony.

In conclusion, I desire to say that I claim no credit for this work,
save that which is due to an honest desire to promote the truth for its
own sake. Sincerely believing in the correctness of my hypothesis, I
have not hesitated to follow it to its legitimate conclusion in every
field which I have entered. If at the close of the book I have seemed
to trespass upon the forbidden field of theological discussion, it was
not for the purpose of sustaining any preconceived opinions of my own;
far from it. It was because I was irresistibly led to my conclusions by
the terms of my hypothesis and the inflexible logic of its application.
I cannot but be aware that my conclusions sometimes oppose the
preconceived opinions of others. But no one who accepts my hypothesis
as the true one will be compelled more frequently than I have been to
renounce his former convictions.

  T.J.H.

  WASHINGTON, D.C.
  October 21, 1892.




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER I.

    INTRODUCTORY.

                                                                      PAGE

    Necessity of a Working Hypothesis.--The Newtonian Hypothesis.--The
    Atomic Theory.--A Psychological Hypothesis
    necessary.--Theories of Hypnotism and Mesmerism.--Spiritism.--Mental
    Therapeutics.--Li�bault's Law of Suggestion.--Duality
    of Mind.--A Working Hypothesis for
    Psychology formulated.--Its Three Terms                              19


    CHAPTER II.

    DUALITY AND SUGGESTION.

    The Doctrine of the Trinity of Man.--The Greek Philosophy.--The Early
    Christian Fathers.--Hermetic Philosophy.--Swedenborg.--Duality in
    Modern Philosophy.--"Objective" and "Subjective" Minds.--Their
    Distinctive Differences and Modes of Operation.--The Subjective
    Mind a Distinct Entity.--Illustrations from Hypnotism.--Suggestion.
    --Auto-Suggestion.--Universality of the Law of Suggestion            27


    CHAPTER III.

    REASONING POWERS OF THE TWO MINDS DIFFERENTIATED.

    The Subjective Mind incapable of Inductive Reasoning.--Its
    Processes always Deductive, or Syllogistic.--Its Premises
    the Result of Suggestion.--Illustrations by Hypnotism.--Hypnotic
    Interview with Socrates.--Reasons from an Assumed
    Major Premise.--Interview with a Philosophic Pig.--The
    Pig affirms the Doctrine of Reincarnation.--Dogmatism
    of Subjective Intelligence.--Incapable of Controversial
    Argument.--Persistency in following a Suggested Line of
    Thought                                                              33


    CHAPTER IV.

    PERFECT MEMORY OF THE SUBJECTIVE MIND.

    Confirmed by Hypnotic Phenomena.--Opinions of Psychologists.--Sir
    William Hamilton's Views.--Observations of Dr. Rush.--Talent for
    Poetry and Music developed by Abnormal Conditions.--Talent for Drawing
    evolved by Madness.--Resuscitation of Knowledge in the
    Insane.--Extraordinary Feats of Memory during Illness.--A Forgotten
    Language recovered.--Whole Pages of Greek and Hebrew remembered by
    an Illiterate Servant Girl.--Speaking in Unknown Tongues
    explained.--The Result of the Operations of Natural Law              40


    CHAPTER V.

    SUBJECTIVE MEMORY (_continued_).

    Practical Illustrations.--Reasons for Limitations of Subjective
    Power.--Its Practical Significance.--Its Application to the Solution of
    Problems of Insanity.--The Mental Phenomena of "Genius."--Napoleon
    Bonaparte.--Shakspeare.--Poets.--Artists.--Macaulay's Estimate of Poets
    and Poetry.--Dangers of Subjective Control.--Lord Byron.--Socrates'
    Estimate of Poets.--His Recognition of the Subjective Element in Poetic
    Composition.--Occasional Inconveniences.--Unconscious
    Plagiarism.--Observations of Holmes.--Improvisation.--Solution
    of the Shakspeare-Bacon Problem.--The Subjective in Art.--Madness in
    Art.--Great Orators.--Webster.--Clay.--Patrick
    Henry.--Incidents.--Practical Conclusions                            48


    CHAPTER VI.

    PERCEPTION OF THE FIXED LAWS OF NATURE.

    Three Sub-Classes of Mental Phenomena.--Mathematical
    Prodigies.--Musical Prodigies.--Measurement of Time.--Distinction
    between Results of Objective Education and
    Intuitive Perception.--Zerah Colburn, the Mathematical
    Prodigy.--The Lightning Calculator.--Blind Tom, the
    Musical Prodigy.--The Origin and Uses of Music.--East
    Indian Fakirs.--Measurement of Time.--The Power possessed
    by Animals.--Illustrative Incidents.--Hypnotic
    Subjects.--Jouffroy's Testimony.--Bernheim's Views.--Practical
    Observations.--The Normal Functions of Objective
    Intelligence.--The Limitations of Subjective Intelligence
    pertains to its Earthly State only.--Its Kinship to
    God demonstrated by its Limitations.--Omniscience cannot
    reason inductively.--Induction is Inquiry.--Perception the
    Attribute of Omniscience.--Conclusions regarding the
    Power of the Soul                                                    62


    CHAPTER VII.

    EFFECTS OF ADVERSE SUGGESTION.

    The Subjective Mind incapable of Controversial Argument.--A
    Sceptical Audience demoralizes it.--The Presence of an
    Avowed Sceptic prevents Successful Exhibition of Subjective
    Phenomena.--Labouchere and Bishop.--The Royal
    Academy of Medicine.--Its Offer to Clairvoyants.--Failure
    to earn Reward.--Harmonious Conditions required by
    Spiritists.--The Seybert Commission.--Trance-speaking
    Mediums.--How demoralized.--Adverse Suggestion the
    Cause of Failure in all Cases.--Possible Lack of Telepathic
    Conditions in Bishop's Case.--General Conclusions.--Failure
    Consistent with Honesty of Mediums                                   75


    CHAPTER VIII.

    HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM.

    Warfare of the Schools.--History of the Science.--Mesmer's
    Career.--The Academicians.--The Successors of Mesmer.--The
    Royal Academy of Medicine.--Its Idiotic Prejudices.--Dr.
    Braid's Discovery.--Re-baptism of the Science.--Effects
    of Braid's Discoveries.--Li�bault's Theory of Suggestion.--The
    Nancy School and the Paris School compared.--The
    Fluidic Theory.--The Law of Suggestion the Greatest
    Discovery in Psychic Science.--The Significance of
    Braid's Discoveries not appreciated.--Hypnotism of Animals.--The
    Charcot School.--The Sources of its Errors.--Reform
    in Terminology suggested.--The Mesmeric Theory.--Braid's
    Processes not productive of Higher Phenomena.--Mesmerization
    of Animals.--Recapitulation of Points                                81


    CHAPTER IX.

    HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM (_continued_).

    Mesmeric Methods.--The Fluidic Theory.--Influence of the
    Mind of the Operator.--The Early Mesmerists.--Their
    Methods and their Effects.--Decadence of the Higher Phenomena
    under Braid's Methods.--The Causes explained.--Telepathic
    Powers developed by Mesmerism.--Mesmerism
    as a Therapeutic Agent.--Method of Operation recommended.--How
    to acquire the Power.--The Necessary
    Conditions of Success.--Will-Power explained.--The
    Fluidic Theory requires Revision.--Distinction between
    Mesmerism and Hypnotism sharply drawn.--Mesmerization
    of Animals distinguished from the Hypnotization of Animals.--Methods
    employed in each.--Tamers of Horses and Wild
    Beasts.--Dog-Trainers.--Primitive Man.--His Powers.--His
    Immunity from Harm.--Daniel.--The Adepts.--General
    Conclusions                                                         105


    CHAPTER X.

    HYPNOTISM AND CRIME.

    Platform Experiments misleading,--Their Utter Inutility as a
    Test.--So-called "Tests" described and explained.--Sexual
    Outrages impossible.--Auto-Suggestion protects the
    Virtuous.--A Willing Subject necessary.--Demonstrative
    Experiments.--Modern Authorities cited against Themselves.--Professor
    Gregory's Views.--The Elevated Moral
    Tone of Subjects when mesmerized.--Successful Suggestion
    of Suicide impossible.--The Three Normal Functions of
    the Subjective Mind.--Self-Preservation.--Propagation.--Preservation
    of Offspring.--Instinctive Auto-Suggestion.--Indifference
    on Near Approach of Death.--A Universal Law.--Illustrative
    Incidents.--Suggestive Criminal Abortion
    impossible.--Premonitions explained.--The D�mon of
    Socrates.--Clairaudience.--The Instinct of Death.--Hypnotism
    in Jurisprudence.--Testimony valueless.--Vital
    Secrets impossible to obtain.--Doctors must not monopolize
    the Forces of Nature.--The Folly of Adverse Legislation             122


    CHAPTER XI.

    PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS.

    Historical Notes.--Mind Cure in Ancient Times.--Bible
    Accounts.--Miracles of the Church.--Healing by the King's
    Touch.--Views of Paracelsus and Pomponazzi.--Bernheim's
    Experiments.--The Modern Schools.--Their Theories.--The
    True Hypothesis applicable to All Systems.--Illustrations
    of the Theory.--Producing a Blister by Suggestion.--Bloody
    Stigmata.--Letters of Blood.--Objective Control of Subjective
    Mind.--Subjective Control of Bodily Functions.--The
    Necessary Mental Conditions.--The Precepts and
    Example of Christ.--Subjective Faith alone required.--Discussion
    of Various Systems.--Christian Science, etc.--General
    Conclusions                                                         144


    CHAPTER XII.

    PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Methods classified in Two Divisions.--Mental and Oral
    Suggestions.--Absent Treatment.--Christian Scientists handicapped
    by Absurd Theories.--They claim too much.--The Use of Drugs.--Dangers
    arising from too Radical Change.--Importance of Favorable Mental
    Environment.--Mental Healing requires Mental Conditions.--Treatment
    by Hypnotism.--Bernheim's Methods.--Illustrative Cases.--The
    Practical Value of the System.--The Illogical Limitations
    of the Theory.--Potency of Telepathic Suggestion.--Researches
    of the Society for Psychical Research.--Mr. Gurney's Experiments.--They
    demonstrate the Theory of Effluent Emanations.--Diagnosis by
    Intuition.--Potency of Mesmerism.--Permanency of Cures.--Conditions
    necessary.--The Example of Jesus.--Self-Healing by Auto-suggestion  161


    CHAPTER XIII.

    A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS.

    Telepathy the Normal Means of Communication between Subjective
    Minds.--Perfect Passivity required for Therapeutic
    Suggestions.--Natural Sleep the Most Perfect State of
    Passivity.--Hypnotic Sleep and Natural Sleep identical.--Phenomena
    of Dreams.--Subjective Mind controllable by
    Suggestion during Natural Sleep.--Illustrative Incidents.--Passivity
    a Necessity on the Part of the Operator.--The Subjective Mind can
    be caused to convey Telepathic Messages during Sleep.--Illustrative
    Experiments                                                         176


    CHAPTER XIV.

    A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Recapitulation of Propositions.--Natural Sleep the Best Condition
    attainable both for Healer and Patient.--Demonstrative
    Experiments.--Healing at a Distance of One Thousand
    Miles.--Distance no Obstacle.--Space does not exist for
    the Subjective Mind.--Objective Habits of Thought the
    only Adverse Factor.--Diseases treated.--Strabismus
    cured.--Mode of Operation.--Not a Good Money-making
    Scheme.--It promotes the Health of the Healer.--A
    Method of Universal Utility.--Self-Healing its most Important
    Function.--The Power absolute.--Within the Reach
    of All.--Method of Self-Healing.--The Patient's Credulity
    not overtaxed.--The Example of Christ.--Material Remedies
    not to be ignored.--Advice to Christian Scientists.--The
    Control of Dreams.--Practical Conclusions                           191


    CHAPTER XV.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    If a Man die, shall he live again?--The Problem not solved by
    Spiritistic Phenomena.--The Phenomena admitted.--Their Supernatural
    Origin denied.--Explained by the Hypothesis.--Subsidiary
    Hypothesis.--An Intelligent Dynamic Force.--Its
    Characteristics.--Limited by Medium's Intelligence.--It is
    controlled by Suggestion.--Phenomena fail in Presence of
    Scepticism.--Reasons.--Mediumistic Frauds.--The Primary Lesson
    in Spiritistic Investigation.--Mediums not necessarily
    dishonest.--Their Honest Belief in the Phenomena.--Suggestion
    explains all.--Illustrations from Hypnotism.--Convincing Character
    of Alleged Communications.--Telepathic Explanations.--General
    Conclusions                                                         205


    CHAPTER XVI.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Various Classes of Phenomena.--Clairvoyance.--Its Field not yet
    clearly defined.--Telepathy invades its Ancient Domain.--Simple
    Experiments in Telepathy.--Their Significance.--Telepathic Power
    in Mediums.--Telepathic Visions.--A Typical S�ance.--Wonderful
    Exhibition of Telepathic Power.--An Affecting Interview of the
    Sitter with Himself.--Deductions.--Visions of Inanimate Things as
    well as of Deceased Persons.--Spirit of the Jack of
    Clubs.--Subjective Memory.--Spirit Identity.--Allan Kardec's
    Observations.--His Illogical Conclusions.--His Supreme
    Test.--Telepathic Explanation.--Four Ways of explaining his Test
    Case                                                                219


    CHAPTER XVII.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Psychometry.--"The Souls of Things."--Professor Denton's
    Experiments.--Wonderful Visions of the Ancient Environment of
    Geological Specimens.--A Piece of Mortar from Cicero's
    House.--Supposed Scientific Tests.--Explanation on Telepathic
    Principles.--Experiments in Hypnotism compared.--Clairvoyance
    and Telepathy.--Their Boundary Lines in
    Transit.--Clairaudience.--Definitions of the Term.--Socrates
    and his D�mon.--Modern Instances.--Mental
    Impressions.--Premonitions.--Their Unreliability.--Remarkable
    Examples of Clairaudience.--A Lawyer's Experience.--Subject
    to the Law of Suggestion.--Insanity sometimes results from
    Ignorance of the Cause.--Practical Suggestions                      238


    CHAPTER XVIII.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    The Planchette.--Modifications.--Easily operated.--Automatic
    Writing.--Governed by the Universal Law.--The Planchette without
    Spirits.--The Planchette and Telepathy.--Trance.--Ancient and
    Modern Superstitions relating to Trance.--Religious Systems
    founded on Trance.--Visions.--Swedenborg.--Oriental
    Philosophy.--Its Slow Growth and Stupendous Proportions.--Spiritistic
    Philosophy.--Its Evolution.--All founded on Trance Visions, in
    Ignorance of the Law of Suggestion.--Cahagnet's Mesmeric
    Seers.--Their Revelations.--Objective and Subjective
    Visions.--Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy.--Visions of the Holy
    Virgin.--The Physical and Mental Attitude of Prayer.--The Prayer of
    Faith.--Obsession.--Possession.--Casting out Devils.--Devils out
    of Fashion.--The Influence of Suggestion.--The Element of
    Telepathy.--Dual Personality.--Loss of Identity.--Characteristics.--The
    Case of Ansel Bourne.--Possible Explanation.--A Proof of the Dual
    Hypothesis.--Multiple Personality                                   251


    CHAPTER XIX.

    THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    The Intelligence manifested.--It is a Human Intelligence.--Inherent
    Probabilities.--Conditions requisite.--The Best
    Conditions.--A Living Organism necessary.--The Laws of Telepathy
    and Suggestion prevail.--Slate-Writing.--A Wonderful Slate-Writing
    S�ance.--Telepathic and Psycho-Physical Power displayed in
    Perfection.--Demonstration of its Mundane Origin.--An Unexpected
    Phenomenon.--Summary of Results.--Syllogism.--General
    Conclusions.--Spiritistic Phenomena do not constitute Valid
    Evidence of a Life beyond the Grave.--An Argument for Immortality   271


    CHAPTER XX.

    PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD.

    Ghosts.--Scientific Investigations.--Tentative Classification of
    Phenomena.--Power to create Phantasms demonstrated.--Investigations
    of the London Society for Psychical Research.--Spirit
    Photography.--Projection of the "Astral Body."--Witches.--Conditions
    necessary.--The same in all Cases.--Spirit
    "Materialization."--Magicians.--Ghosts the Creations of the
    Subjective Entity.--Eliphas Levi's Views.--Raising the
    Devil.--Crystal Visions.--Propositions established.--Embodied
    Thoughts.--Phantasms not Spirits.--Uniform Characteristics.--A New
    Classification.--Conditions of Objectivity and Persistency.--Haunted
    Houses.---No General Intelligence manifested.--D'Assier's
    Statements.--A Remarkable Case.--Ghosts Intensified Telepathic
    Visions.--Difference in Degree, not in Kind.--Ghosts not controllable
    by Suggestion.--Other Salient Peculiarities.--Ghosts
    neither prove nor disprove Immortality.--Mental Atmosphere
    of Houses.--Remarkable Cases.--Classification of Telepathic
    Phenomena.--Conclusions                                             286


    CHAPTER XXI.

    SUSPENDED ANIMATION AND PREMATURE BURIAL.

    Facts of Startling Import.--The Case of Washington Irving
    Bishop.--Other Instances of Suspended
    Animation.--Vampirism.--Catalepsy.--East Indian Fakirs buried
    alive for Months.--Fundamental Errors.--Catalepsy not a
    Disease.--A Recuperative Agent.--The Law of Suggestion governs
    the Phenomena.--Subjective Insensibility impossible.--Suggestion
    of Death deepens the Lethargy.--The Appalling Dangers of
    Catalepsy.--The Proper Treatment                                    309


    CHAPTER XXII.

    PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS.

    The Normal Relations of the Objective and Subjective
    Faculties.--Their Distinctive Powers and Functions.--The
    Infinite Wisdom displayed in their Distribution.--It
    constitutes Man a Free Moral Agent.--Limitation of Subjective
    Powers and Responsibilities in this Life.--The Kinship of
    the Soul to God.--The Limitation of the Powers of the
    Objective Mind.--The Transcendent Powers of the Soul.--Errors
    of the Old
    Philosophers.--The Normal Functions of the Soul in Earthly
    Life.--Dangers of Abnormal Exercise of Subjective Power.--Nervous
    Disorders, Insanity, Imbecility, and Moral Degradation.--The
    Importance of a Knowledge of the Law of Suggestion.--Dangers
    of Mediumship.--Trance-Speakers.--Immoral Tendency of Ignorant
    Mediumship.--Tendency towards Free Love.--The Causes.--The
    Orientalists.--Their Greater Powers, and their Greater
    Facilities for Self-Delusion.--Practical Conclusions.--Warnings     321


    CHAPTER XXIII.

    THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    The Great Stumbling-Block, Unbelief in the Physical History
    of Christ.--Modern Science confirms the New Testament.--Internal
    Evidence of the Truth of the History of Jesus.--The
    Scientific Accuracy of His Statements.--The Exoteric
    and the Esoteric Doctrines.--Parables.--Esoteric Doctrines
    reserved for Modern Science to discover.--The Spirit of
    Truth.--Jesus the first to proclaim the Scientific Truth.--The
    Doctrine of Faith.--Healing the Sick.--Natural Law.--Faith
    essential then as now.--Illustrative Incidents.--Jairus'
    Daughter.--Seven Scientific Steps.--Secrecy enjoined.--Scientific
    Reasons.--Rediscovery of the Science of Mental Therapeutics in
    Modern Times.--Nothing discovered that Jesus did not know.--Absent
    Treatment.--The Power to heal transmitted to all Future
    Generations.--The Conditions.--Conclusions                          338


    CHAPTER XXIV.

    THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CHRIST (_continued_).

    The Word _Faith_ in its Application to Psychic Phenomena.--Its
    Definition.--An Epitome of the Law of Suggestion.--Subjective
    Faith only required.--Illustrative Incident.--The "Spoken
    Word."--Jesus knew the Law, and always acted within its
    Limitations.--Intuitive Perception of the Laws of
    the Soul.--His Manhood and its Limitations.--Our Warranty
    of Title as Sons of God.--Christ constantly controlled
    by Reason.--His Subjective Powers subservient.--The
    Three Temptations illustrative.--The Great Lesson to
    Mankind.--The Normal Exercise of Subjective Power.--Simon
    the Sorcerer.--Miracle not a Necessary Explanation of the
    Power of Christ.--Conclusions                                       359


    CHAPTER XXV.

    THE SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    The Necessity of Signs and Wonders.--Christ's Work was for
    All-Time.--His Consummate Wisdom.--Signs and Wonders
    as Evidence.--His Perception of Spiritual Laws.--The Perceptive
    Powers of the Soul.--Propositions.--Presumptive
    Evidence of His Knowledge of Spiritual Laws.--Condition
    precedent to Immortality.--Faith the Essential Condition.--The
    Declarations of Christ.--He meant just what He said.--The
    Doctrines of the Church.--Literal Extinction of the
    Soul through Unbelief.--Belief essential to Salvation.--Belief
    will not avert the Consequences of Sin.--Inherent
    Probabilities.--The Conscious Existence of the Soul.--The
    Law of Suggestion applied.--Scepticism constitutes a Fatal
    Suggestion.--Phenomena of Hypnotism illustrative.--Souls
    of Animals have no Conscious Existence; hence
    not Immortal.--Christ as a Saviour of Souls.--His Doctrine
    new to the World, but scientifically correct                        374


    CHAPTER XXVI.

    THE MISSION OF CHRIST. FUTURE REWARDS AND
    PUNISHMENTS.

    The Success of Christ's Mission.--Chaotic State of Spiritual
    Philosophy in His Time.--The Various Doctrines in Vogue.--Jesus
    the first to simplify the Doctrine of Immortality.--He
    gave it a Definite Status in Philosophy.--The Doctrine
    of Future Rewards and Punishments.--God will "Render
    to every Man according to his Deeds."--Spiritual Penalties
    for Violations of Spiritual Law.--The Sin against the Holy
    Ghost.--The Sin of Unbelief.--The Status of a Lost Soul.--Possible
    Reincarnation.--The Means of Punishment for
    Sin.--Affections.--Conscience.--Memory.--General
    Conclusions.--Scientific Basis of Christianity                      389


    CHAPTER XXVII.

    DEDUCTIONS FROM VARIOUS ATTRIBUTES OF THE SOUL.

    The Question of Identity.--Consciousness and Memory.--Identity
    considered in Reference to Rewards and
    Punishments.--Conscience.--Conflicting Theories of
    Psychologists.--Education and Intuition.--Different Standards
    of Morality.--The Soul's Perception of the Eternal Principles
    of Right and Wrong.--The Instinct of Worship.--Its Abnormal
    Manifestations.--The Law of Suggestion.--Universality of
    the Sentiment of Worship.--Its Normal Manifestations.--Demonstrative
    of the Existence of a God of Love.--Old Arguments invalid.--Socrates
    and Paley.--Argument predicated on the Affectional
    Emotions.--Syllogistic Deductions.--The Divine Pedigree of Man      400




[Illustration]




THE

LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.

    Necessity of a Working Hypothesis.--The Newtonian Hypothesis.--The
    Atomic Theory.--A Psychological Hypothesis necessary.--Theories
    of Hypnotism and Mesmerism.--Spiritism.--Mental
    Therapeutics.--Li�bault's Law of Suggestion.--Duality of Mind.--A
    Working Hypothesis for Psychology formulated.--Its Three Terms.


Substantial progress in any science is impossible in the absence
of a working hypothesis which is universal in its application to
the phenomena pertaining to the subject-matter. Indeed, until such
an hypothesis is discovered and formulated, no subject of human
investigation can properly be said to be within the domain of the exact
sciences. Thus, astronomy, previous to the promulgation of Kepler's
Laws and the formulation of the Newtonian hypothesis of gravitation,
was in a state of chaos, and its votaries were hopelessly divided by
conflicting theories. But the moment Newton promulgated his theorem a
revolution began which eventually involved the whole scientific world.
Astronomy was rescued from the domain of empiricism, and became an
exact science. What the Newtonian hypothesis did for astronomy, the
atomic theory has done for chemistry. It enables one skilled in that
science to practise it with a certainty of results in exact proportion
to his knowledge of its principles and his skill in applying them to
the work in hand. He knows that if he can combine hydrogen and oxygen,
in the proportion of two atoms of the former to one of the latter,
water will be the result. He knows that one atom, or part, of oxygen
and one of carbon combined under heat will produce carbonic oxide,--a
poisonous gas; that the addition of another atom, or part, of oxygen
will produce carbonic anhydride (dioxide),--a harmless gas; and so on
throughout the vast realm of chemical combinations.

The fact that the literal correctness of a given hypothesis is not
demonstrable except by results, in no wise militates against its
value in the domain to which it belongs. Indeed, it would cease to
be a hypothesis the moment it were demonstrated. Newton's theorem
is undemonstrable except from its results. Its correspondence,
however, with every known fact, the facility with which astronomical
calculations can be made, and the precision with which every result can
be predicted, constitute a sufficient demonstration of its substantial
correctness to inspire the absolute confidence of the scientific
world. No one would hesitate to act in the most important concerns of
life--nay, to stake his very existence--upon calculations based upon
Newton's hypothesis. Yet there are not found wanting men who deny or
doubt its abstract correctness. Volumes have been written to disprove
it. But as no one has yet discovered a fact or witnessed a phenomenon
outside of its domain, the world refuses to surrender its convictions.
When such a fact is discovered, then, and not till then, will there
arise a necessity for revising the "Principia." It is a trite and true
saying that one antagonistic fact will destroy the value of the finest
theory ever evolved.

It is equally impossible to demonstrate the abstract correctness of
the atomic theory. An appeal to the evidence found in uniform results
is all that is possible to one who would give a reason for the faith
that is in him. No one ever saw, felt, tasted, or smelled an atom.
It is beyond the reach of the senses; nor is it at all probable that
science or skill will ever be able to furnish instrumental aids capable
of enabling man to take cognizance of the ultimate unit of matter. It
exists for man only in hypothesis. Nevertheless, the fact remains,
that in all the wide range of human investigation there is not a more
magnificent generalization, nor one more useful to mankind in its
practical results, than the atomic theory. Yet there are those who
doubt its abstract correctness, and labor to disprove the existence
of the atom. If the ultimate object of chemical science were to
demonstrate the existence of the atom, or to seize it and harness it
to the uses of mankind, it might be worth while to set the chemical
fraternity right by demonstrating its non-existence. If the practice of
chemistry on the basis of the theory were defective in its practical
results, or failed in universal application, it would then be the duty
of scientists to discard it entirely, and to seek a better working
hypothesis.

The most that can be said of any scientific hypothesis is, that whether
true in the abstract or not, everything happens just as though it
were true. When this test of universality is applied, when no known
fact remains that is unexplained by it, the world is justified in
assuming it to be true, and in deducing from it even the most momentous
conclusions. If, on the contrary, there is one fact pertaining to the
subject-matter under investigation which remains outside the domain
of the hypothesis, or which is unexplained by it, it is indubitable
evidence that the hypothesis is unsafe, untrue, and consequently
worthless for all practical purposes of sound reasoning. Thus, Sir
Isaac Newton, after having formulated his theorem, threw it aside as
worthless, for a time, upon making the discovery that the moon, in its
relations with the earth, apparently did not come within the terms of
his hypothesis. His calculations were based upon the then accepted
estimate of the length of a degree of latitude. This estimate having
been corrected by the careful measurements of Picard, Newton revised
his figures, and found that the supposed discrepancy did not exist.
The last doubt in his mind having been thus set at rest, he gave to
the world a theorem which rendered possible substantial progress in
astronomical science.

In the field of psychological investigation a satisfactory working
hypothesis has never been formulated. That is to say, no theory has
been advanced which embraces all psychological phenomena. Many theories
have been advanced, it is true, to account for the various classes of
phenomena which have been observed. Some of them are very plausible and
satisfactory--to their authors--when applied to a particular class of
facts, but utterly fail when confronted with another class.

Thus, the students of the science of hypnotism are, and since the
days of Mesmer have been, hopelessly divided into schools which wage
war upon each other's theories, and dispute the correctness of each
other's observations of facts. Mesmer's theory of fluidic emanations,
which he termed "animal magnetism," seemed to account for the facts
which he observed, and is still held to be substantially true by many
votaries of this science. John Bovee Dods' electrical theory--positive
lungs and negative blood--was sufficiently plausible in its day to
attract many followers, as it afforded a satisfactory explanation of
many phenomena which came under his observation. Braid's physiological
explanation of certain classes of the phenomena afforded, in his time,
much comfort to those who believe that there is nothing in man which
cannot be weighed in a balance or carved with a scalpel. In our own
day we find the school of the Salp�tri�re, which holds that hypnotism
is a disease of the nervous system, that its phenomena are explicable
on physiological principles, that the suggestions of the operator
play but a secondary _r�le_ in their production, and that they can be
produced, or successfully studied, only in diseased persons. On the
other hand, the Nancy school of hypnotists holds that the science can
be studied with profit only in perfectly healthy persons, and from a
purely psychological standpoint, and that suggestion is the all-potent
factor in the production of all hypnotic phenomena. All three of
the last-mentioned schools agree in ignoring the possibility of
producing the higher phenomena of hypnotism, known as clairvoyance and
thought-transference, or mind-reading; whilst the earlier hypnotists
demonstrated both beyond the possibility of a reasonable doubt. Indeed,
a committee of the ablest scientists of the Royal Academy of Medicine
of France, after an investigation extending over a period of six years,
reported that it had demonstrated the existence of such powers in the
human mind.

Another large class of psychological phenomena, which has been
productive of more conflicting theories than any other, and which from
time immemorial has puzzled and appalled mankind, is by a large class
of persons referred to the direct agency of the spirits of the dead.
It would require a volume to catalogue the various theories which have
been advanced to account for this class of phenomena, and when done
it would serve no useful purpose. It is safe to say, however, that
no two individuals, whether believers or unbelievers in the generic
doctrine of spiritism, exactly agree as to the ultimate cause of the
phenomena. The obvious reason is that no two persons have had exactly
the same experience, or have observed exactly the same phenomena. In
the absence of a working hypothesis applicable to all the infinite
variety of facts observed, it follows that each investigator must draw
his own conclusions from the limited field of his own experience. And
when we take into consideration the important _r�le_ which passion
and prejudice ever play in the minds of men when the solution of
an undemonstrable problem is attempted, it is easy to see that a
bewildering hodge-podge of heterogeneous opinions is inevitable.

Another class of phenomena, about which an infinite variety of
opinions prevails, may be mentioned under the general head of mental
therapeutics. Under this generic title may be grouped the invocations
of the gods by the Egyptian priests; the magic formulas of the
disciples of Esculapius; the sympathetic powder of Paracelsus; the
king's touch for the cure of goitre; the wonderful cures at the tomb of
Deacon Paris and at Lourdes; the miraculous power supposed to reside in
the relics of the saints; the equally miraculous cures of such men as
Greatrakes, of Gassner, and of the Abbot Prince of Hohenlohe; and the
no less wonderful healing power displayed by the modern systems known
as mind cure, faith cure, Christian science, animal magnetism, and
suggestive therapeutics.

One fact, pregnant with importance, pertains to all these systems;
and that is that marvellous cures are constantly effected through
their agencies. To the casual observer it would seem to be almost
self-evident that, underlying all, there must be some one principle
which, once understood, would show them to be identical as to cause and
mode of operation. Yet we find as many conflicting theories as there
are systems, and as many private opinions as there are individuals who
accept the facts. Some of the hypotheses gravely put forth in books are
so bizarre as to excite only the pity or the ridicule of the judicious.
One notable example is found in that system, the basic theory of which
is that matter has no existence, that nothing is real but mind, and
that, consequently, disease and pain, suffering and death, are mere
hallucinations of morbid intellects. Other theories there are, which,
if not equally absurd, are probably equally remote from the truth; and
each treats the persons as well as the opinions of the others with
that virulent contumely which is the ever-present resort of him who
would force upon his neighbor the acceptance of his own undemonstrable
article of faith. Nevertheless, as before remarked, the fact remains
that each of these systems effects some most wonderful results in the
way of curing certain diseases.

What is true of the phenomena embraced under the general head of
mental therapeutics is also true of the whole range of psychological
phenomena; namely, the want of a working hypothesis which shall apply
to all the facts that have been observed and authenticated.

No successful attempt has heretofore been made to supply this want;
nor has success been possible until within a very recent period,
for the simple reason that previous to the discovery of certain
facts in psychological science, the scientific world was without the
necessary data from which a correct hypothesis could be formulated.
The researches of Professor Li�bault in the domain of hypnotism,
seconded by those of his pupil, Professor Bernheim, have resulted
in discoveries which throw a flood of light upon the whole field of
psychological investigation. Their field of observation being confined
to hypnotism, and chiefly to its employment as a therapeutic agent, it
is not probable that either of those eminent scientists realized the
transcendent importance of their principal discovery, or perceived that
it is applicable to psychological phenomena outside the domain of their
special studies. The discovery is this: _that hypnotic subjects are
constantly amenable to the power of suggestion; that suggestion is the
all-potent factor in the production of all hypnotic phenomena_. This
proposition has been demonstrated to be true beyond the possibility
of a reasonable doubt. In subsequent chapters of this book it will
be shown that this fact supplies the missing link in the chain of
propositions necessary for a complete working hypothesis for the
subject under consideration.

The general propositions applicable to all phases of psychological
phenomena are here only briefly stated, leaving the minor, or
subsidiary, propositions necessary for the elucidation of particular
classes and sub-classes of phenomena to be stated under their
appropriate heads.

The first proposition relates to the dual character of man's mental
organization. That is to say, man has, or appears to have, two minds,
each endowed with separate and distinct attributes and powers; each
capable, under certain conditions, of independent action. It should
be clearly understood at the outset that for the purpose of arriving
at a correct conclusion it is a matter of indifference whether we
consider that man is endowed with two distinct minds, or that his one
mind possesses certain attributes and powers under some conditions,
and certain other attributes and powers under other conditions. It
is sufficient to know that everything happens just as though he were
endowed with a dual mental organization.

Under the rules of correct reasoning, therefore, I have a right to
assume that MAN HAS TWO MINDS; and the assumption is so stated, in
its broadest terms, as the first proposition of my hypothesis. For
convenience I shall designate the one as the _objective_ mind, and
the other as the _subjective_ mind. These terms will be more fully
explained at the proper time.

The second proposition is, that THE SUBJECTIVE MIND IS CONSTANTLY
AMENABLE TO CONTROL BY SUGGESTION.

The third, or subsidiary, proposition is, that THE SUBJECTIVE MIND IS
INCAPABLE OF INDUCTIVE REASONING.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

DUALITY AND SUGGESTION.

    The Doctrine of the Trinity of Man.--The Greek
    Philosophy.--The Early Christian Fathers.--Hermetic
    Philosophy.--Swedenborg.--Duality in Modern
    Philosophy.--"Objective" and "Subjective" Minds.--Their
    Distinctive Differences and Modes of Operation.--The
    Subjective Mind a Distinct Entity.--Illustrations from
    Hypnotism.--Suggestion.--Auto-Suggestion.--Universality of the Law
    of Suggestion.


The broad idea that man is endowed with a dual mental organization is
far from being new. The essential truth of the proposition has been
recognized by philosophers of all ages and nations of the civilized
world. That man is a trinity, made up of "body, soul, and spirit,"
was a cardinal tenet in the faith of many ancient Greek philosophers,
who thus clearly recognized the dual character of man's mental or
spiritual organization. Plato's idea of terrestrial man was that he is
a "trinity of soul, soul-body, and earth-body." The mystic jargon of
the Hermetic philosophers discloses the same general idea. The "salt,
sulphur, and mercury" of the ancient alchemists doubtless refers to man
as being composed of a trinity of elements. The early Christian Fathers
confidently proclaimed the same doctrine, as is shown in the writings
of Clement, Origen, Tatian, and other early exponents of Christian
doctrine.

Indeed, it may be safely assumed that the conception of this
fundamental truth was more or less clearly defined in the minds of
all ancient philosophers, both Christian and pagan. It is the basis
of their conception of God as a Trinity in his personality, modes
of existence, and manifestations,--a conception of which Schelling
says: "The philosophy of mythology proves that a trinity of divine
potentialities is the root from which have grown the religious ideas of
all nations of any importance that are known to us."

In later times, Swedenborg, believing himself to be divinely inspired,
declared that "There appertain to every man an internal man, a rational
man, and an external man, which is properly called the natural man."
Again, he tells us that there are three natures, or degrees of life, in
man,--"the natural, the spiritual, and the celestial."

Of modern writers who accept the dual theory, Professor Wigan, Dr.
Brown-S�quard, and Professor Proctor are notable examples. Numerous
facts are cited by these writers, demonstrating the broad fact of
duality of mind, although their theory of causation, based on cerebral
anatomy, will not bear a moment's examination in the light of the facts
of hypnotic science.

In more recent years[1] the doctrine of duality of mind is beginning
to be more clearly defined, and it may now be said to constitute a
cardinal principle in the philosophy of many of the ablest exponents of
the new psychology.

Thousands of examples might be cited to show that in all the ages the
truth has been dimly recognized by men of all civilized races and in
all conditions of life. Indeed, it may be safely predicated of every
man of intelligence and refinement that he has often felt within
himself an intelligence not the result of education, a perception of
truth independent of the testimony of his bodily senses.

It is natural to suppose that a proposition, the substantial
correctness of which has been so widely recognized, must not only
possess a solid basis of truth, but must, if clearly understood,
possess a veritable significance of the utmost importance to mankind.

Hitherto, however, no successful attempt has been made to define
clearly the nature of the two elements which constitute the dual
mind; nor has the fact been recognized that the two minds possess
distinctive characteristics. It is a fact, nevertheless, that the line
of demarcation between the two is clearly defined; that their functions
are essentially unlike; that each is endowed with separate and distinct
attributes and powers; and that each is capable, under certain
conditions and limitations, of independent action.

For want of a better nomenclature, I shall distinguish the two by
designating the one as _objective_, and the other as _subjective_.
In doing so the commonly received definitions of the two words will
be slightly modified and extended; but inasmuch as they more nearly
express my exact meaning than any others that occur to me, I prefer to
use them rather than attempt to coin new ones.

In general terms the difference between man's two minds may be stated
as follows:--

The objective mind takes cognizance of the objective world. Its media
of observation are the five physical senses. It is the outgrowth of
man's physical necessities. It is his guide in his struggle with his
material environment. Its highest function is that of reasoning.

The subjective mind takes cognizance of its environment by means
independent of the physical senses. It perceives by intuition. It is
the seat of the emotions, and the storehouse of memory. It performs
its highest functions when the objective senses are in abeyance. In a
word, it is that intelligence which makes itself manifest in a hypnotic
subject when he is in a state of somnambulism.

In this state many of the most wonderful feats of the subjective mind
are performed. It sees without the use of the natural organs of vision;
and in this, as in many other grades, or degrees, of the hypnotic
state, it can be made, apparently, to leave the body, and travel to
distant lands and bring back intelligence, oftentimes of the most exact
and truthful character. It also has the power to read the thoughts of
others, even to the minutest details; to read the contents of sealed
envelopes and of closed books. In short, it is the subjective mind
that possesses what is popularly designated as clairvoyant power, and
the ability to apprehend the thoughts of others without the aid of the
ordinary, objective means of communication.

In point of fact, that which, for convenience, I have chosen to
designate as the subjective mind, appears to be a separate and distinct
entity; and the real distinctive difference between the two minds seems
to consist in the fact that the "objective mind" is merely the function
of the physical brain, while the "subjective mind" is a distinct
entity, possessing independent powers and functions, having a mental
organization of its own, and being capable of sustaining an existence
independently of the body. In other words, it is the soul. The reader
would do well to bear this distinction clearly in mind as we proceed.

One of the most important, as well as one of the most striking,
points of difference between the two minds, relates to the subject of
suggestion. It is in this that the researches of the modern hypnotists
give us the most important aid. Whether we agree with the Paris school
in giving to suggestion a secondary place among the causes of hypnotic
phenomena, or with the Nancy school in ascribing all the phenomena to
the potentiality of suggestion, there can be no doubt of the fact that
when suggestion is actively and intelligently employed, it is always
effective. The following propositions, therefore, will not be disputed
by any intelligent student of hypnotism:--

1. That the objective mind, or, let us say, man in his normal
condition, is not controllable, against reason, positive knowledge, or
the evidence of his senses, by the suggestions of another.

2. That the subjective mind, or man in the hypnotic state, is
unqualifiedly and constantly amenable to the power of suggestion.

That is to say, the subjective mind accepts, without hesitation or
doubt, every statement that is made to it, no matter how absurd or
incongruous or contrary to the objective experience of the individual.
If a subject is told that he is a dog, he will instantly accept the
suggestion, and, to the limit of physical possibility, act the part
suggested. If he is told that he is the President of the United States,
he will act the part with wonderful fidelity to life. If he is told
that he is in the presence of angels, he will be profoundly moved to
acts of devotion. If the presence of devils is suggested, his terror
will be instant, and painful to behold. He may be thrown into a state
of intoxication by being caused to drink a glass of water under the
impression that it is brandy; or he may be restored to sobriety by
the administration of brandy, under the guise of an antidote to
drunkenness. If told that he is in a high fever, his pulse will become
rapid, his face flushed, and his temperature increased. In short, he
may be made to see, hear, feel, smell, or taste anything, in obedience
to suggestion. He may be raised to the highest degree of mental or
physical exaltation by the same power, or be plunged by it into the
lethargic or cataleptic condition, simulating death.

These are fundamental facts, known and acknowledged by every student
of the science of hypnotism. There is another principle, however,
which must be mentioned in this connection, which is apparently not
so well understood by hypnotists generally. I refer to the phenomenon
of auto-suggestion. Professor Bernheim and others have recognized its
existence, and its power to modify the results of experiments in one
class of hypnotic phenomena, but apparently have failed to appreciate
its full significance. It is, in fact, of coextensive importance with
the general principle, or law, of suggestion, and is an essential part
of it. It modifies every phenomenon, and sometimes seems to form an
exception to the general law. Properly understood, however, it will be
seen, not only to emphasize that law, but to harmonize all the facts
which form apparent exceptions to it.

The two minds being possessed of independent powers and functions,
it follows as a necessary corollary that the subjective mind of an
individual is as amenable to the control of his own objective mind
as to the objective mind of another. This we find to be true in a
thousand ways. For instance, it is well known that a person cannot be
hypnotized against his will. As the hypnotic condition is usually
induced by the suggestion of the operator, his failure is due to the
contrary auto-suggestion of the subject. Again, if the subject submits
to be hypnotized, but resolves beforehand that he will not submit to
certain anticipated experiments, the experiments are sure to fail. One
of the finest hypnotic subjects known to the writer would never allow
himself to be placed in a position before a company which he would
shrink from in his normal condition. He was possessed of a remarkable
dignity of character, and was highly sensitive to ridicule; and this
sensitiveness stepped in to his defence, and rendered abortive every
attempt to cause him to place himself in a ridiculous attitude. Again,
if a hypnotic subject is conscientiously opposed to the use of strong
drink, no amount of persuasion on the part of the operator can induce
him to violate his settled principles. And so on, through all the
varying phases of hypnotic phenomena, auto-suggestion plays its subtle
_r�le_, often confounding the operator by resistance where he expected
passive obedience. It does not militate against the force of the rule
that suggestion is the all-controlling power which moves the subjective
mind. On the contrary, it confirms it, demonstrates its never-failing
accuracy. It shows, however, that the stronger suggestion must always
prevail. It demonstrates, moreover, that the hypnotic subject is not
the passive, unreasoning, and irresponsible automaton which hypnotists,
ancient and modern, have believed him to be.

As this is one of the most important branches of the whole subject
of psychological phenomena, it will be more fully treated when the
various divisions of the subject to which the principle is applicable
are reached. In the mean time, the student should not for a moment lose
sight of this one fundamental fact, that the subjective mind is always
amenable to the power of suggestion by the objective mind, either that
of the individual himself, or that of another who has, for the time
being, assumed control.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Since the above was written, Du Prel's able and
interesting work, entitled "The Philosophy of Mysticism," has appeared,
in which the dual theory is demonstrated beyond question by reference
to the phenomena of dreams.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER III.

REASONING POWERS OF THE TWO MINDS DIFFERENTIATED.

    The Subjective Mind incapable of Inductive Reasoning.--Its
    Processes always Deductive or Syllogistic.--Its Premises the Result
    of Suggestion.--Illustrations by Hypnotism.--Hypnotic Interview
    with Socrates.--Reasons from an Assumed Major Premise.--Interview
    with a Philosophic Pig.--The Pig affirms the Doctrine of
    Reincarnation.--Dogmatism of Subjective Intelligence.--Incapable of
    Controversial Argument.--Persistency in following a Suggested Line
    of Thought.


One of the most important distinctions between the objective and
subjective minds pertains to the function of reason. That there is
a radical difference in their powers and methods of reasoning is a
fact which has not been noted by any psychologist who has written on
the subject. It is, nevertheless, a proposition which will be readily
conceded to be essentially true by every observer when his attention is
once called to it. The propositions may be briefly stated as follows:--

1. The objective mind is capable of reasoning by all
methods,--inductive and deductive, analytic and synthetic.

2. The subjective mind is incapable of inductive reasoning.

Let it here be understood that this proposition refers to the powers
and functions of the purely subjective mind, as exhibited in the mental
operations of persons in a state of profound hypnotism, or trance. The
prodigious intellectual feats of persons in that condition have been a
source of amazement in all the ages; but the striking peculiarity noted
above appears to have been lost sight of in admiration of the other
qualities exhibited. In other words, it has never been noted that their
reasoning is always deductive, or syllogistic. The subjective mind
never classifies a series of known facts, and reasons from them up to
general principles; but, given a general principle to start with, it
will reason deductively from that down to all legitimate inferences,
with a marvellous cogency and power. Place a man of intelligence and
cultivation in the hypnotic state, and give him a premise, say in
the form of a statement of a general principle of philosophy, and no
matter what may have been his opinions in his normal condition, he
will unhesitatingly, in obedience to the power of suggestion, assume
the correctness of the proposition; and if given an opportunity to
discuss the question, will proceed to deduce therefrom the details of
a whole system of philosophy. Every conclusion will be so clearly and
logically deducible from the major premise, and withal so plausible and
consistent, that the listener will almost forget that the premise was
assumed. To illustrate:--

The writer once saw Professor Carpenter, of Boston, place a young
gentleman in the hypnotic state at a private gathering in the city
of Washington. The company was composed of highly cultivated ladies
and gentlemen of all shades of religious belief; and the young man
himself--who will be designated as C--was a cultured gentleman,
possessed a decided taste for philosophical studies, and was a graduate
of a leading college. In his normal condition he was liberal in his
views on religious subjects, and, though always unprejudiced and open
to conviction, was a decided unbeliever in modern spiritism. Knowing
his love of the classics and his familiarity with the works of the
Greek philosophers, the professor asked him how he should like to have
a personal interview with Socrates.

"I should esteem it a great privilege, if Socrates were alive,"
answered C.

"It is true that Socrates is dead," replied the professor; "but I can
invoke his spirit and introduce you to him. There he stands now,"
exclaimed the professor, pointing towards a corner of the room.

C looked in the direction indicated, and at once arose, with a look of
the most reverential awe depicted on his countenance. The professor
went through the ceremonial of a formal presentation, and C, almost
speechless with embarrassment, bowed with the most profound reverence,
and offered the supposed spirit a chair. Upon being assured by the
professor that Socrates was willing and anxious to answer any question
that might be put to him, C at once began a series of questions,
hesitatingly and with evident embarrassment at first; but, gathering
courage as he proceeded, he catechised the Greek philosopher for over
two hours, interpreting the answers to the professor as he received
them. His questions embraced the whole cosmogony of the universe and
a wide range of spiritual philosophy. They were remarkable for their
pertinency, and the answers were no less remarkable for their clear-cut
and sententious character, and were couched in the most elegant and
lofty diction, such as Socrates himself might be supposed to employ.
But the most remarkable of all was the wonderful system of spiritual
philosophy evolved. It was so clear, so plausible, and so perfectly
consistent with itself and the known laws of Nature that the company
sat spell-bound through it all, each one almost persuaded, for the time
being, that he was listening to a voice from the other world. Indeed,
so profound was the impression that some of them--not spiritists,
but members of the Christian Church--then and there announced their
conviction that C was actually conversing either with the spirit of
Socrates or with some equally high intelligence.

At subsequent gatherings other pretended spirits were called up,
among them some of the more modern philosophers, and one or two who
could not be dignified with that title. When a modern spirit was
invoked, the whole manner of C changed. He was more at his ease, and
the conversation on both sides assumed a purely nineteenth-century
tone. But the philosophy was the same; there was never a lapse or
an inconsistency. With the introduction of every new spirit there
was a decided change of diction and character and general style of
conversation, and each one was always the same, whenever reintroduced.
If the persons themselves had been present, their distinctive
peculiarities could not have been more marked; but if all that was said
could have been printed in a book _verbatim_, it would have formed one
of the grandest and most coherent systems of spiritual philosophy ever
conceived by the brain of man, and its only blemish would have been the
frequent change of the style of diction.

It must not be forgotten that C was not a spiritist, and that the whole
bent of his mind inclined to materialism. He frequently expressed
the most profound astonishment at the replies he received. This was
held to be an evidence that the replies were not evolved from his own
inner consciousness. Indeed, it was strenuously urged by some of the
company present that he must have been talking with an independent
intelligence, else his answers would have coincided with his own
belief while in his normal condition. The conclusive answer to that
proposition is this: He was in the subjective state. He had been told
that he was talking face to face with a disembodied spirit of superior
intelligence. He believed the statement implicitly, in obedience to the
law of suggestion. He saw, or thought he saw, a disembodied spirit.
The inference, for him, was irresistible that this was a demonstration
of the truth of spiritism; that being assumed, the rest followed as a
natural inference. He was, then, simply reasoning deductively from an
assumed major premise, thrust upon him, as it were, by the irresistible
force of a positive suggestion. His reasoning was perfect of its kind,
there was not a flaw in it; but it was purely syllogistic, from general
principles to particular facts.

It will doubtless be said that this does not prove that he was not in
actual converse with a spirit. True; and if the conversation had been
confined to purely philosophical subjects, its exalted character would
have furnished plausible grounds for a belief that he was actually
in communion with the inhabitants of a world where pure intelligence
reigns supreme. But test questions were put to one of the supposed
spirits, with a view of determining this point. One of them was asked
where he died. His reply was, "In a little town near Boston." The fact
is that he had lived in a little town near Boston, and the somnambulist
knew it. But he died in a foreign land,--a fact which the somnambulist
did not know. C was subsequently, when in his normal condition,
informed of the failure of this test question, and was told at the same
time what the facts were concerning the circumstances of the death of
the gentleman whose spirit was invoked. He was amused at the failure,
as well as at the credulity of those who had believed that he had been
in conversation with spirits; but at a subsequent sitting he was again
informed that the same spirit was present, and he at once manifested
the most profound indignation because of the deception which had been
practised upon him by the said spirit, and demanded an explanation of
the falsehood which he had told concerning the place of his death.
Then was exhibited one of the most curious phases of subjective
intelligence. The spirit launched out into a philosophical disquisition
on the subject of spirit communion, and defined the limitations of
spiritual intercourse with the inhabitants of this earth in such a
philosophical and plausible manner that not only was the young man
mollified, but the spiritists present felt that they had scored a
triumph, and had at last heard an authoritative explanation of the fact
that spirits are limited in their knowledge of their own antecedents by
that of the medium through whom they communicate.

For the benefit of those who will say that there is, after all,
no proof that C was not in actual communication with a superior
intelligence, it must be stated that at a subsequent s�ance he was
introduced to a very learned and very philosophical pig, who spoke all
the modern languages with which C was acquainted, and appeared to know
as much about spiritual philosophy as did the ancient Greek. C had been
told that the pig was a reincarnation of a Hindoo priest whose "karma"
had been a little off color, but who retained a perfect recollection
of his former incarnation, and had not forgotten his learning. It is
perhaps unnecessary to say that the pig was able to, and did, give a
very learned and eminently satisfactory exposition of the doctrine of
reincarnation and of Hindoo philosophy in general. As C was then fresh
from his reading of some modern theosophical works, he was apparently
much gratified to find that they were in substantial accord with the
views of the pig.

The inference to be drawn from these facts is obvious and irresistible:
the subjective mind of the young man accepted the suggestion of the
operator as an absolute verity. The deductions from the premises thus
given were evolved from his own inner consciousness. But that he
believed them to have been imparted to him by a spirit, is as certain
as that he believed that he saw a spirit.

It must not be understood from the statement of the general proposition
regarding the subjective processes of reasoning that persons in the
subjective state necessarily go through the forms of syllogistic
reasoning. On the contrary, they seldom, if ever, employ the forms of
the syllogism, and it is rare that their discourses are argumentative.
They are generally, in fact, dogmatic to the last degree. It never
seems to occur to them that what they state to be a fact can possibly
be, in the slightest degree, doubtful. A doubt, expressed or implied,
of their perfect integrity, of the correctness of their statements, or
of the genuineness of the phenomena which is being exhibited through
them, invariably results in confusion and distress of mind. Hence they
are incapable of controversial argument,--a fact which constitutes
another important distinction between the objective and subjective
minds. To traverse openly the statements of a person in the subjective
state, is certain to restore him to the normal condition, often with
a severe nervous shock. The explanation of these facts is easy to
find in the constant amenability of the subjective mind to the power
of suggestion. They are speaking or acting from the standpoint of one
suggestion, and to controvert it is to offer a counter suggestion which
is equally potent with the first. The result is, and must necessarily
be, utter confusion of mind and nervous excitement on the part of the
subject. These facts have an important bearing upon many psychological
phenomena, and will be adverted to more at length in future chapters,
my present purpose being merely to impress upon the reader's mind the
general principles governing subjective mental phenomena.

It will be seen from the foregoing that when it is stated that the
subjective mind reasons deductively, the results of its reasoning
processes are referred to rather than its forms. That is to say, whilst
it may not employ the forms of the syllogism, its conclusions are
syllogistically correct,--are logically deducible from the premises
imparted to it by suggestion. This peculiarity seems to arise from,
or to be the necessary result of, the persistency with which the
subjective mind will follow every idea suggested. It is well known
to hypnotists that when an idea is suggested to a subject, no matter
of how trivial a character, he will persist in following that idea
to its ultimate conclusion, or until the operator releases him from
the impression. For instance, if a hypnotist suggests to one of his
subjects that his back itches, to another that his nose bleeds, to
another that he is a marble statue, to another that he is an animal,
etc., each one will follow out the line of his particular impression,
regardless of the presence of others, and totally oblivious to all his
surroundings which do not pertain to his idea; and he will persist in
doing so until the impression is removed by the same power by which it
was created. The same principle prevails when a thought is suggested
and the subject is invited to deliver a discourse thereon. He will
accept the suggestion as his major premise; and whatever there is
within the range of his own knowledge or experience, whatever he has
seen, heard, or read, which confirms or illustrates that idea, he has
at his command and effectually uses it, but is apparently totally
oblivious to all facts or ideas which do not confirm, and are not
in accord with, the one central idea. It is obvious that inductive
reasoning, under such conditions, is out of the question.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV.

PERFECT MEMORY OF THE SUBJECTIVE MIND.

    Confirmed by Hypnotic Phenomena.--Opinions of Psychologists.--Sir
    William Hamilton's Views.---Observations of Dr. Rush.--Talent for
    Poetry and Music developed by Abnormal Conditions.--Talent for
    Drawing evolved by Madness.--Resuscitation of Knowledge in the
    Insane.--Extraordinary Feats of Memory during Illness.--A Forgotten
    language recovered.--Whole Pages of Greek and Hebrew remembered
    by an Illiterate Servant Girl.--Speaking in Unknown Tongues
    explained.--The Result of the Operations of Natural Law.


One of the most striking and important peculiarities of the subjective
mind, as distinguished from the objective, consists in its prodigious
memory. It would perhaps be hazardous to say that the memory of the
subjective mind is perfect, but there is good ground for believing that
such a proposition would be substantially true. It must be understood
that this remark applies only to the most profoundly subjective state
and to the most favorable conditions. In all degrees of hypnotic sleep,
however, the exaltation of the memory is one of the most pronounced
of the attendant phenomena. This has been observed by all hypnotists,
especially by those who make their experiments with a view of studying
the mental action of the subject. Psychologists of all shades of belief
have recognized the phenomena, and many have declared their conviction
that the minutest details of acquired knowledge are recorded upon the
tablets of the mind, and that they only require favorable conditions to
reveal their treasures.

Sir William Hamilton, in his "Lectures on Metaphysics," page 236,
designates the phenomenon as "latent memory." He says:--

    "The evidence on this point shows that the mind frequently contains
    whole systems of knowledge, which, though in our normal state
    they have faded into absolute oblivion, may, in certain abnormal
    states--as madness, febrile delirium, somnambulism, catalepsy,
    etc.--flash out into luminous consciousness, and even throw into
    the shade of unconsciousness those other systems by which they
    had, for a long period, been eclipsed, and even extinguished. For
    example, there are cases in which the extinct memory of whole
    languages was suddenly restored; and, what is even still more
    remarkable, in which the faculty was exhibited of accurately
    repeating, in known or unknown tongues, passages which were never
    within the grasp of conscious memory in the normal state."

Sir William then proceeds to quote, with approval, a few cases which
illustrate the general principle. The first is on the authority of Dr.
Rush, a celebrated American physician:

    "The records of the wit and cunning of madmen," says the doctor,
    "are numerous in every country. Talents for eloquence, poetry,
    music, and painting, and uncommon ingenuity in several of the
    mechanical arts, are often evolved in this state of madness. A
    gentleman whom I attended in an hospital in the year 1810, often
    delighted as well as astonished the patients and officers of our
    hospital by his displays of oratory in preaching from a table in
    the hospital yard every Sunday. A female patient of mine who became
    insane, after parturition, in the year 1807, sang hymns and songs
    of her own composition during the latter stage of her illness,
    with a tone of voice so soft and pleasant that I hung upon it with
    delight every time I visited her. She had never discovered a talent
    for poetry or music in any previous part of her life. Two instances
    of a talent for drawing, evolved by madness, have occurred within
    my knowledge. And where is the hospital for mad people in which
    elegant and completely rigged ships and curious pieces of machinery
    have not been exhibited by persons who never discovered the least
    turn for a mechanical art previous to their derangement?

    "Sometimes we observe in mad people an unexpected resuscitation
    of knowledge; hence we hear them describe past events, and speak
    in ancient or modern languages, or repeat long and interesting
    passages from books, none of which, we are sure, they were capable
    of recollecting in the natural and healthy state of their mind."[2]

It must be remembered that when these events occurred, the profession
knew little of the phenomena of hypnotism. In the light of present
knowledge on that subject it is easy to understand that the phenomena
here recorded are referable to one common origin, whatever may have
been the proximate cause of their manifestation. There are many ways by
which the subjective mind may be caused to become active and dominant
besides deliberately producing hypnotic sleep. Diseases of various
kinds, particularly those of the brain or nervous system, and intense
febrile excitement, are frequently causes of the total or partial
suspension of the functions of the objective mind, and of exciting the
subjective mind to intense activity.

The next case quoted by Sir William is from "Recollections of the
Valley of the Mississippi," by an American clergyman named Flint:--

    "I am aware," he remarks, "that every sufferer in this way is apt
    to think his own case extraordinary. My physicians agreed with all
    who saw me that my case was so. As very few live to record the
    issue of a sickness like mine, and as you have requested me, and
    as I have promised, to be particular, I will relate some of the
    circumstances of this disease. And it is in my view desirable,
    in the bitter agony of such diseases, that more of the symptoms,
    sensations, and sufferings should have been recorded than have
    been; and that others in similar predicaments may know that some
    before them have had sufferings like theirs, and have survived
    them. I had had a fever before, and had risen, and been dressed
    every day. But in this, with the first day I was prostrated to
    infantine weakness, and felt, with its first attack, that it was a
    thing very different from what I had yet experienced.

    "Paroxysms of derangement occurred the third day, and this was to
    me a new state of mind. That state of disease in which partial
    derangement is mixed with a consciousness generally sound, and
    sensibility preternaturally excited, I should suppose the most
    distressing of all its forms. At the same time that I was unable
    to recognize my friends, I was informed that my memory was more
    than ordinarily exact and retentive, and that I repeated whole
    passages in the different languages which I knew, with entire
    accuracy. I recited, without losing or misplacing a word, a passage
    of poetry which I could not so repeat after I recovered my health."

The following more curious case is given by Lord Monboddo in his
"Ancient Metaphysics":[3]--

    "It was communicated in a letter from the late Mr. Hans Stanley,
    a gentleman well known both to the learned and political world,
    who did me the honor to correspond with me upon the subject of my
    first volume of Metaphysics. I will give it in the words of that
    gentleman. He introduces it by saying that it is an extraordinary
    fact in the history of mind, which he believes stands single,
    and for which he does not pretend to account; then he goes on to
    narrate it: 'About six-and-twenty years ago, when I was in France,
    I had an intimacy in the family of the late Mar�chal de Montmorenci
    de Laval. His son, the Comte de Laval, was married to Mademoiselle
    de Manpeaux, the daughter of a lieutenant-general of that name, and
    the niece of the late chancellor. This gentleman was killed at the
    battle of Hastenbeck. His widow survived him some years, but is
    since dead.

    "'The following fact comes from her own mouth; she has told it
    me repeatedly. She was a woman of perfect veracity and very good
    sense. She appealed to her servants and family for the truth.
    Nor did she, indeed, seem to be sensible that the matter was so
    extraordinary as it appeared to me. I wrote it down at the time,
    and I have the memorandum among some of my papers.

    "'The Comtesse de Laval had been observed, by servants who sat up
    with her on account of some indisposition, to talk in her sleep
    a language that none of them understood; nor were they sure, or,
    indeed, herself able to guess, upon the sounds being repeated to
    her, whether it was or was not gibberish.

    "'Upon her lying-in of one of her children she was attended by a
    nurse who was of the province of Brittany, and who immediately knew
    the meaning of what she said, it being in the idiom of the natives
    of that country; but she herself when awake did not understand a
    single syllable of what she had uttered in her sleep, upon its
    being retold her.

    "'She was born in that province, and had been nursed in a family
    where nothing but that language was spoken; so that in her first
    infancy she had known it, and no other; but when she returned to
    her parents, she had no opportunity of keeping up the use of it;
    and, as I have before said, she did not understand a word of Breton
    when awake, though she spoke it in her sleep.

    "'I need not say that the Comtesse de Laval never said or imagined
    that she used any words of the Breton idiom, more than were
    necessary to express those ideas that are within the compass of a
    child's knowledge of objects.'"

A highly interesting case is given by Mr. Coleridge in his "Biographia
Literaria."[4]

    "It occurred," says Mr. Coleridge, "in a Roman Catholic town in
    Germany, a year or two before my arrival at G�ttingen, and had
    not then ceased to be a frequent subject of conversation. A young
    woman of four or five and twenty, who could neither read nor write,
    was seized with a nervous fever, during which, according to the
    asseverations of all the priests and monks of the neighborhood, she
    became possessed, and as it appeared, by a very learned devil. She
    continued incessantly talking Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in very
    pompous tones, and with most distinct enunciation. This possession
    was rendered more probable by the known fact that she was, or
    had been, a heretic. Voltaire humorously advises the devil to
    decline all acquaintance with medical men; and it would have been
    more to his reputation if he had taken this advice in the present
    instance. The case had attracted the particular attention of a
    young physician, and by his statement many eminent physiologists
    and psychologists visited the town and cross-examined the case
    on the spot. Sheets full of her ravings were taken down from her
    own mouth, and were found to consist of sentences, coherent and
    intelligible each for itself, but with little or no connection with
    each other. Of the Hebrew, a small portion only could be traced to
    the Bible; the remainder seemed to be in the Rabbinical dialect.
    All trick or conspiracy was out of the question. Not only had the
    young woman ever been a harmless, simple creature, but she was
    evidently laboring under a nervous fever. In the town in which
    she had been resident for many years as a servant in different
    families, no solution presented itself. The young physician,
    however, determined to trace her past life step by step; for the
    patient herself was incapable of returning a rational answer. He
    at length succeeded in discovering the place where her parents had
    lived; travelled thither, found them dead, but an uncle surviving;
    and from him learned that the patient had been charitably taken by
    an old Protestant pastor at nine years old, and had remained with
    him some years, even till the old man's death. Of this pastor the
    uncle knew nothing, but that he was a very good man. With great
    difficulty, and after much search, our young medical philosopher
    discovered a niece of the pastor's who had lived with him as his
    housekeeper, and had inherited his effects. She remembered the
    girl; related that her venerable uncle had been too indulgent, and
    could not bear to hear the girl scolded; that she was willing to
    have kept her, but that, after her parent's death, the girl herself
    refused to stay. Anxious inquiries were then, of course, made
    concerning the pastor's habits; and the solution of the phenomenon
    was soon obtained. For it appeared that it had been the old man's
    custom for years to walk up and down a passage of his house into
    which the kitchen-door opened, and to read to himself, with a loud
    voice, out of his favorite books. A considerable number of these
    were still in the niece's possession. She added that he was a very
    learned man and a great Hebraist. Among the books were found a
    collection of Rabbinical writings, together with several of the
    Greek and Latin Fathers; and the physician succeeded in identifying
    so many passages with those taken down at the young woman's bedside
    that no doubt could remain in any rational mind concerning the true
    origin of the impressions made on her nervous system."

The reader will not fail to observe that in all these cases the
subjects reproduced simply what they had seen, heard, or read. The
impressions upon the objective mind, particularly in the case related
by Coleridge, must have been superficial to the last degree; but the
result demonstrated that the record upon the tablets of the subjective
mind was ineffaceable.

These are not isolated cases. Thousands of similar phenomena have been
recorded by the most trustworthy of observers. Their significance
cannot be mistaken. In their light the wonderful mental feats of
trance-speakers are easily explicable, without invoking the aid of
a supernatural agency. Speaking "in unknown tongues" is seen to be
merely a feat of subjective memory.

When we consider what a prodigy of learning the average man would be if
he could have at his command all that he had ever seen, heard, or read;
when we remember that the subjective mind does record, and does have
at its command, all the experiences of the individual, and that, under
certain abnormal conditions, in obedience to the initial impulse of
suggestion, all its treasures are instantly available,--we may marvel
at the wonderful gifts with which the human mind is endowed; but we
may rest assured that the phenomena displayed are the results of the
operations of natural law.

The reader should distinctly bear in mind that there is a wide
distinction between objective and subjective memory. The former is
one of the functions of the brain, and, as has been shown by recent
investigations, has an absolute localization in the cerebral cortex;
and the different varieties of memory, such as visual memory, auditory
memory, memory of speech, etc., can be destroyed by localized disease
or by a surgical operation. Subjective memory, on the other hand,
appears to be an inherent power, and free from anatomical relations; or
at least it does not appear to depend upon the healthy condition of the
brain for its power of manifestation. On the contrary, the foregoing
facts demonstrate the proposition that abnormal conditions of the brain
are often productive of the most striking exhibitions of subjective
memory. The late Dr. George M. Beard of New York, who was the first
American scientist clearly to recognize the scientific importance of
the phenomena of hypnotism, who was the formulator of the "Six Sources
of Error" which beset the pathway of the investigator of that science,
and the one who did more than any other American of his time to place
the study of hypnotic phenomena on a scientific basis, evinces a clear
recognition of this distinction when he says:--

    "To attempt to build up a theory of trance [hypnotic phenomena]
    on a basis of cerebral anatomy is to attempt the impossible. All
    theories of trance based on cerebral anatomy or physiology--such as
    suspension of the activity of the cortex, or half the brain--break
    down at once when brought face to face with the facts."[5]

All the facts of hypnotism show that the more quiescent the objective
faculties become, or, in other words, the more perfectly the functions
of the brain are suspended, the more exalted are the manifestations
of the subjective mind. Indeed, the whole history of subjective
phenomena goes to show that the nearer the body approaches the
condition of death, the stronger become the demonstrations of the
powers of the soul. The irresistible inference is that when the soul
is freed entirely from its trammels of flesh, its powers will attain
perfection, its memory will be absolute. Of this more will be said in
its proper place. In the mean time, it may be proper here to remark
that subjective memory appears to be the only kind or quality of
memory which deserves that appellation; it is the only memory which is
absolute. The memory of the objective mind, comparatively speaking, is
more properly designated as recollection. The distinction here sought
to be made can be formulated in no better language than that employed
by Locke in defining the scope and meaning of the two words: "When
an idea again recurs without the operation of the like object on the
external sensory, it is _remembrance_; if it be sought after by the
mind, and with pain and endeavor found, and brought again into view, it
is _recollection_."[6]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 2: Beasley on the Mind, p. 474.]

[Footnote 3: Vol. ii. p. 217.]

[Footnote 4: Vol. i. p. 117 (edit. 1847).]

[Footnote 5: Nature and Phenomena of Trance ("Hypnotism" or
"Somnambulism"), p. 6.]

[Footnote 6: Essays Concerning Human Understanding, vol. i. p. 213.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

SUBJECTIVE MEMORY (_continued_).

    Practical Illustrations.--Reasons for Limitations of
    Subjective Power.--Its Practical Significance.--Its
    Application to the Solution of Problems of
    Insanity.--The Mental Phenomena of "Genius."--Napoleon
    Bonaparte.--Shakspeare.--Poets.--Artists.--Macaulay's Estimate
    of Poets and Poetry.--Dangers of Subjective Control.--Lord
    Byron.--Socrates' Estimate of Poets.--His Recognition of
    the Subjective Element in Poetic Composition.--Occasional
    Inconveniences.--Unconscious Plagiarism.--Observations of
    Holmes.--Improvisation.--Solution of the Shakspeare-Bacon
    Problem.--The Subjective in Art.--Madness in Art.--Great
    Orators.--Webster.--Clay.--Patrick Henry.--Incidents.--Practical
    Conclusions.


It is thought that the facts related in the preceding chapter
are sufficient to demonstrate the substantial correctness of the
proposition that the memory of the subjective mind is practically
perfect. Before leaving this branch of the subject, however, and
proceeding to detail other peculiarities which distinguish the two
minds, it is deemed proper to offer a few practical illustrations
of the principles involved, drawn from common observation, and
incidentally to apply those principles to the solution of various
problems of every-day experience. It will be remembered that thus far
we have confined our observations to the operations of the subjective
mind when the subject is in a diseased or in a deeply hypnotic
condition, with the objective senses in complete abeyance. This has
been done for the purpose of more clearly illustrating the fundamental
propositions. The phenomena of purely subjective mental action, are,
however, of little practical importance to mankind when compared with
the action of the subjective mind modified by the co-ordinate power of
the objective intelligence.

It is not to be supposed that an All-wise Providence has placed
within the human frame a separate entity, endowed with such wonderful
powers as we have seen that it possesses, and hedged about by the
limitations with which we know it to be environed, without so ordaining
its relations with man's objective intelligence as to render it of
practical value to the human race in its struggle with its physical
environment. It might at first glance seem incongruous to suppose that
the subjective mind could be at once the storehouse of memory and
the source of inspiration, limited as to its methods and powers of
reasoning, and at the same time subject to the imperial control of the
objective mind. A moment's reflection, however, will show that in the
very nature of things it must necessarily be true. "A house divided
against itself cannot stand." There must be a controlling power in
every well-regulated household, municipality, nation, or organism.
There is a positive and a negative force in the greatest physical power
known to mankind. There is a male and a female element in every race
and order of created organisms; and those philosophers who hold that
there appertain to every man a male and a female element have dimly
recognized the duality of man's mental organization.

Why it is that the objective mind has been invested with the
controlling influence, limited as are its resources and feeble as are
its powers, is a question upon which it would be idle to speculate.
It profits us only to know the fact and to study its practical
significance, without wasting our energies in seeking to know the
ultimate cause. We may rest assured that in this, as in all other laws
of Nature, we shall find infinite wisdom.

If any one doubts the wisdom of investing the objective mind with
the controlling power in the dual organization, let him visit a
madhouse. There he will see all shades and degrees of subjective
control. There he will see men whose objective minds have completely
abdicated the throne, and whose subjective minds are in pursuit of one
idea,--controlled by one dominant impression, which subordinates all
others. These are the monomaniacs,--the victims of false suggestions.
These suggestions may be given from without, in a thousand different
ways which will be readily recognized by the student of insanity, or
by auto-suggestion. Long and intense concentration of mind upon one
subject, and inordinate egotism, will be readily recognized as striking
illustrations of the power of auto-suggestion as a factor in monomania.
The maniac is one whose objective mind is disorganized by disease
of its organ, the brain; the result being distortion of objective
impressions, and consequent false suggestions to the subjective mind.

Those who study the subject from this standpoint will find an easy
solution to many an obscure problem. The subject is here adverted to
merely to show the consequences arising from allowing the subjective
mind to usurp complete control of the mental organization. It will
be readily seen that human society, outside of lunatic asylums,
constantly furnishes numerous examples of abnormal subjective control.
So generally is this fact recognized that it has passed into a proverb
that "every man is insane on some subject."

The question arises, What part does the subjective mind play in
the normal operation of the human intellect? This question may be
answered in a general way by saying that the most perfect exhibition
of intellectual power is the result of the synchronous action of the
objective and subjective minds. When this is seen in its perfection
the world names it _genius_. In this condition the individual has the
benefit of all the reasoning powers of the objective mind, combined
with the perfect memory of the subjective mind and its marvellous power
of syllogistic arrangement of its resources. In short, all the elements
of intellectual power are then in a state of intense and harmonious
activity. This condition may be perfectly normal, though it is rarely
seen in its perfection. Probably the most striking examples which
history affords were Napoleon Bonaparte and Shakspeare. The intelligent
student of the history of their lives and work will not fail to recall
a thousand incidents which illustrate the truth of this proposition.
True genius is undoubtedly the result of the synchronous action of the
two minds, neither unduly predominating or usurping the powers and
functions of the other. When the subjective is allowed to dominate, the
resultant acts of the individual are denominated "the eccentricities of
genius." When the subjective usurps complete control, the individual
goes insane.

There are certain classes of persons whose intellectual labors are
characterized by subjective activity in a very marked degree. Poets
and artists are the most conspicuous examples. So marked is the
peculiarity of the poetic mind in this respect that it has become
almost proverbial. Lord Macaulay, in his Essay on Milton, uses language
which shows that he clearly recognized the subjective element in all
true poetry. He says:--

    "Perhaps no man can be a poet, or can even enjoy poetry, without
    a certain unsoundness of mind,--if anything which gives so much
    pleasure ought to be called unsoundness. By poetry we mean not, of
    course, all writing in verse, nor even all good writing in verse.
    Our definition excludes many metrical compositions which on other
    grounds deserve the highest praise. By poetry we mean the art of
    employing words in such a manner as to produce an illusion on the
    imagination; the art of doing by means of words what the painter
    does by means of colors. Thus the greatest of poets has described
    it, in lines universally admired for the vigor and felicity of
    their diction, and still more valuable on account of the just
    notion which they convey of the art in which he excelled.

                "'As imagination bodies forth
            The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
            Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
            A local habitation and a name.'

     "These are the fruits of the 'fine frenzy' which he ascribes to
    the poet,--a fine frenzy doubtless, but still a frenzy. Truth,
    indeed, is essential to poetry, but it is the truth of madness. The
    reasonings are just, but the premises are false. After the first
    suppositions have been made, everything ought to be consistent; but
    those first suppositions require a degree of credulity which almost
    amounts to a partial and temporary derangement of the intellect.
    Hence, of all people, children are the most imaginative. They
    abandon themselves without reserve to every illusion. Every image
    which is strongly presented to their mental eye produces on them
    the effect of reality. No man, whatever his sensibility may be, is
    ever affected by Hamlet or Lear as a little girl is affected by the
    story of poor Red-Riding-Hood. She knows that it is all false, that
    wolves cannot speak, that there are no wolves in England. Yet in
    spite of her knowledge she believes; she weeps; she trembles; she
    dares not go into a dark room, lest she should feel the teeth of
    the monster at her throat. Such is the despotism of the imagination
    over uncivilized minds."

In other words, such is the despotism of suggestion over the subjective
mind. No truer statement of the methods of subjective mental action
could be written. "The reasonings are just, but the premises are
false," says Macaulay. True, the deductive reasonings of the subjective
mind are always just, logical, syllogistically perfect, and are equally
so whether the premises are false or true.

Macaulay's remark concerning children is eminently philosophical and
true to nature. Children are almost purely subjective; and no one
needs to be told how completely a suggestion, true or false, will take
control of their minds. This is seen in perfection when children are
playing games in which one of them is supposed to be a wild beast. The
others will flee in affected terror from the beast; but the affectation
often becomes a real emotion, and tears, and sometimes convulsions,
result from their fright.

The remark elsewhere made regarding the eccentricities of genius
applies in a marked degree to poets. It is probable that in all the
greater poets the subjective mind often predominates. Certainly the
subjective element is dominant in their works. The career of Lord Byron
is at once a splendid illustration of the marvellous powers and the
inexhaustible resources of the subjective mind in a man of learning and
cultivation, and a sad commentary on the folly and danger of allowing
the subjective mind to usurp control of the dual mental organization.

Many of the poems of Coleridge furnish striking examples of the
dominance of the subjective in poetry. His readers will readily recall
the celebrated fragment entitled "Kubla Khan; or, a Vision in a Dream,"
beginning as follows:--

            "In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
            A stately pleasure-dome decree,--
            Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
            Through caverns measureless to man
                  Down to a sunless sea."

It is unfortunately true that the subjective condition in his case was
often brought about by artificial means; and it is expressly stated in
a prefatory note to "Kubla Khan" that this fragment was written while
under the influence of an anodyne. As an illustration of the principle
under consideration it is, however, none the less valuable; while the
career of the gifted but unfortunate poet should serve as a warning
against the practices in which he indulged.

Macaulay further remarks:--

    "In an enlightened age there will be much intelligence, much
    science, much philosophy, abundance of just classification and
    subtle analysis, abundance of wit and eloquence, abundance of
    verses,--and even of good ones,--but little poetry. Men will judge
    and compare; but they will not create."[7]

In other words, this is an age of purely objective cultivation. All our
powers of inductive reasoning are strained to their highest tension in
an effort to penetrate the secrets of physical Nature, and to harness
her dynamic forces. Meantime, the normal exercise of that co-ordinate
power in our mental structure is fast falling into desuetude, and its
manifestations, not being understood, are relegated to the domain of
superstition.

Socrates, in his Apology to the Athenians, seems to have entertained
opinions in regard to poets similar to those of Lord Macaulay. In his
search for wiser men than himself he went first to the politicians.
Failing there, he went to the poets, with the following result:--

    "Taking up, therefore, some of their poems, which appeared to me
    most elaborately finished, I questioned them as to their meaning,
    that at the same time I might learn something from them. I am
    ashamed, O Athenians, to tell you the truth; however, it must be
    told. For, in a word, almost all who were present could have given
    a better account of them than those by whom they had been composed.
    I soon discovered this, therefore, with regard to the poets, that
    they do not effect their object by wisdom, but by a certain natural
    inspiration, and under the influence of enthusiasm, like prophets
    and seers; for these also say many fine things, but they understand
    nothing that they say."

Words could not express more clearly the recognition of the subjective
element in poetic composition; and it exactly accords with Macaulay's
idea regarding the poets and the poetry of the ancient days.

The subjective mind once recognized as a factor in the mental powers
of the poet, it follows that its resources are all at his command.
Its perfect memory, its instant command of all the acquired knowledge
of the individual, however superficially attained or imperfectly
remembered, objectively, is a source of stupendous power. But, like
all other gifts of nature, it is liable at times to be a source of
inconvenience; for it sometimes happens that in ordinary composition a
person will unconsciously reproduce, _verbatim_, some long-forgotten
expressions, perhaps a whole stanza, or even an entire poem. It may,
perchance, be of his own composition; but it is just as likely to be
something that he has read years before and forgotten, objectively, as
soon as read. In this way many persons have subjected themselves to the
charge of plagiarism, when they were totally unconscious of guilt.
Many of the great poets have been accused of minor plagiarisms, and
much inconsiderate criticism has been the result. Oliver Wendell Holmes
mentions unconscious reproduction as one of the besetting annoyances
of a poet's experience. "It is impossible to tell," he says, "in many
cases, whether a comparison which suddenly suggests itself is a new
conception or a recollection. I told you the other day that I never
wrote a line of verse that seemed to me comparatively good, but it
appeared old at once, and often as if it had been borrowed."[8]

A certain class of trance-speaking mediums, so called, are often called
upon to improvise poems, the subject being suggested by some one in the
audience. Often a very creditable performance is the result; but it
more frequently happens that they reproduce something that they have
read.

Sometimes whole poems are thus reproduced by persons in an apparently
normal condition. This accounts for the frequent disputes concerning
the authorship of popular verses. Instances of this kind are fresh
in the minds of most readers, as, for example, a recent controversy
between two well-known writers relative to the authorship of the poem
beginning, "Laugh, and the world laughs with you." The circumstances
of such coincidences often preclude the possibility of either claimant
deliberately plagiarizing the work, or telling a falsehood concerning
its authorship. Yet nothing is more certain than that one of them is
not its author. Possibly neither is entitled to that credit. When, in
the nature of things, it is impossible for either to prove the fact
of authorship, and when the evidence on both sides is about equally
balanced, we may never know the exact truth; but as the theory of
unconscious subjective reproduction is consistent with the literary
honesty of both, it may well be accepted as the true one, aside from
the inherent probability of its correctness.

The solution of the great question as to the authorship of Shakspeare's
works may be found in this hypothesis. The advocates of the Baconian
theory tell us that Shakspeare was an unlearned man. This is true
so far as high scholastic attainments are concerned; but it is also
known that he was a man of extensive reading, and was the companion of
many of the great men of his time, among whom were Bacon, Ben Jonson,
Drayton, Beaumont, Fletcher, and others. It is in evidence that the
Mermaid Tavern was the scene of many an encounter of wit and learning
between these worthies. In this way he was brought into constant
contact with the brightest minds of the Elizabethan age. He was not
only familiar with their works, but he had also the benefit of their
conversation,--which familiarized him with their thoughts and modes
of expression,--and of close personal relations with them in their
convivial moods, when wit and eloquence, learning and philosophy,
flowed as freely as their wine.

The internal evidence of his works shows that Shakspeare's mind,
compared with that of any other poet whose writings are known, was
the most harmoniously developed. In other words, his objective and
subjective faculties were exquisitely balanced. When this fact is
considered in the light of what has been said of the marvellous
powers of subjective memory, and in connection with his intellectual
environment, the source of his power and inspiration becomes apparent.
In his moments of inspiration--and he seems always to have been
inspired when writing--he had the benefit of a perfect memory and a
logical comprehension of all that had been imparted by the brightest
minds of the most marvellous literary and philosophical age in the
history of mankind. Is it any wonder that he was able to strike a
responsive chord in every human breast, to run the gamut of every human
emotion, to portray every shade of human character, and to embellish
his work with all the wit and learning of his day and generation?

Artists constitute another class in whom the subjective faculties
are largely cultivated, and are often predominant. Indeed, no man
can become a true artist whose subjective mind is not cultivated to
a high degree of activity. One may become a good draughtsman, or
learn to delineate a figure with accuracy, or to draw a landscape
with photographic fidelity to objective nature, and in faultless
perspective, by the cultivation of the objective faculties alone;
but his work will lack that subtle something, that name-less charm,
which causes a canvas to glow with beauty, and each particular figure
to become instinct with life and action. No artist can successfully
compose a picture who cannot see "in his mind's eye" the perfected
picture before he touches his pencil to canvas; and just in proportion
to his cultivation of the subjective faculties will he be able thus
to see his picture. Of course these remarks will be understood to
presuppose an objective art education. No man, by the mere cultivation
or exercise of his subjective faculties, can become a great artist, any
more than an ignoramus, by going into a hypnotic trance, can speak the
language of a Webster. All statements to the contrary are merely the
exaggerations of inaccurate observers. Genius in art, as in everything
else, is the result of the harmonious cultivation and synchronous
action of both characteristics of the dual mind.

In art, as in poetry, the undue predominance of the subjective mind
is apt to work disastrously. No better illustration of this is now
recalled than is furnished by the works of Fuseli or of Blake:--

    "Look," says Dendy,[9] "on those splendid illustrations of the
    Gothic poets by the eccentric, the half-mad Fuseli. Look on the
    wild pencillings of Blake, another poet-painter, and you will be
    assured that they were ghost-seers. An intimate friend of Blake has
    told me the strangest tales of his visions. In one of his reveries
    he witnessed the whole ceremony of a fairy's funeral, which he
    peopled with mourners and mutes, and described with high poetic
    beauty. He was engaged, in one of these moods, in painting King
    Edward I., who was sitting to him for his picture. While they were
    conversing, Wallace suddenly presented himself on the field, and
    by this uncourteous intrusion marred the studies of the painter for
    that day.... Blake was a visionary," continues our author, "and
    thought his fancies real; he was mad."

The writer once knew an artist who had the power to enter the
subjective condition at will; and in this state he could cause his
visions to be projected upon the canvas before him. He declared that
his mental pictures thus formed were perfect in detail and color, and
all that he had to do to fix them was to paint the corresponding colors
over the subjective picture. He, too, thought his fancies real; he
believed that spirits projected the pictures upon the canvas.

The foregoing cases represent a class of artists whose subjective
faculties are uncontrolled by the objective mind,--an abnormal
condition, which, if it found expression in words instead of pigments,
would stamp the subject as a candidate for the lunatic asylum.

Fortunately, most artists have their fancies more under control; or,
more properly speaking, they are aware that their visions are evoked
by their own volition. This power varies with different individuals,
but all true artists possess it in a greater or less degree. An
extraordinary manifestation of this power is reported by Combe. The
artist was noted for the rapidity of his work, and was extremely
popular on account of the fidelity of his portraits, and especially
because he never required more than one sitting of his patron. His
method, as divulged by himself, was as follows:--

    "When a sitter came, I looked attentively on him for half an hour,
    sketching from time to time on the canvas. I did not require a
    longer sitting. I removed the canvas and passed to another person.
    When I wished to continue the first portrait, I recalled the man
    to my mind. I placed him on the chair, where I perceived him as
    distinctly as though really there, and, I may add, in form and
    color more decidedly brilliant. I looked from time to time at the
    imaginary figure, and went on painting, occasionally stopping to
    examine the picture exactly as though the original were before me;
    whenever I looked towards the chair I saw the man."

In this way he was enabled to paint over three hundred portraits in one
year.

It is seldom that subjective power is manifested in this particular
manner. It may be added, however, that, given an artist for a subject,
the same phenomena can be reproduced at will by the ordinary processes
of hypnotism. The most common manifestations of the power are not so
easily recognized or distinguished from ordinary mental activity; but
every artist will bear witness that there are times when he works
with extraordinary ease and rapidity, when the work almost seems to
do itself, when there seems to be a force outside of himself which
impels him on, when, to use the common expression to define the mental
condition, he feels that he is "inspired." It is then that the artist
does his best work. It is under these mental conditions that his work
is characterized by that subtle, indefinite charm vaguely expressed by
the word "feeling."

Another class of persons who possess the faculty of evoking at will the
powers of the subjective mind are the great orators, such as Patrick
Henry, Charles Phillips the Irish orator, Henry Clay, Daniel Webster,
and many others, to say nothing of that numerous class of purely
subjective orators known to spiritists as trance, or inspirational,
speakers. The student of the life of Patrick Henry will not fail to
see that his whole history is an illustration of the pertinency of
these remarks. It is related of Clay that on one occasion he was
unexpectedly called upon to answer an opponent who had addressed the
Senate on a question in which Clay was deeply interested. The latter
felt too unwell to reply at length. It seemed imperative, however,
that he should say something; and he exacted a promise from a friend,
who sat behind him, that he would stop him at the end of ten minutes.
Accordingly, at the expiration of the prescribed time the friend
gently pulled the skirts of Mr. Clay's coat. No attention was paid
to the hint, and after a brief time it was repeated a little more
emphatically. Still Clay paid no attention, and it was again repeated.
Then a pin was brought into requisition; but Clay was by that time
thoroughly aroused, and was pouring forth a torrent of eloquence.
The pin was inserted deeper and deeper into the orator's leg without
eliciting any response, until his friend gave it up in despair. Finally
Mr. Clay happened to glance at the clock, and saw that he had been
speaking two hours; whereupon he fell back into his friend's arms,
completely overcome by exhaustion, upbraiding his friend severely for
not stopping him at the time prescribed.

The fact that Mr. Clay, on that occasion, made one of the ablest
speeches of his life, two hours in length, at a time when he felt
almost too ill to rise to his feet, and that his body at the time was
in a condition of perfect anesthesia, is a splendid illustration of the
synchronous action of the two minds, and also of the perfect control
exercised by the subjective mind over the functions and sensations of
the body.

There is, perhaps, no better description on record of the sensations
of a speaker, when the synchronous action of the two minds is
perfect, than that given by Daniel Webster. A friend had asked him
how it happened that he was able, without preparation, to make such a
magnificent effort when he replied to Hayne. The reply was (quoting
from memory) substantially as follows: "In the first place, I have made
the Constitution of the United States the study of my life; and on
that occasion it seemed to me that all that I had ever heard or read
on the subject under discussion was passing like a panorama before me,
arranged in perfectly logical order and sequence, and that all I had to
do was to cull a thunderbolt and hurl it at him."

Two important conclusions are deducible from the premises here
laid down. The first is that it is essential to the highest mental
development that the objective and subjective faculties be cultivated
harmoniously, if the latter are cultivated at all.

The second conclusion is of the most transcendent interest and
importance. It is that the subjective mind should never be allowed to
usurp control of the dual mental organization. Important as are its
functions and transcendent as are its powers, it is hedged about with
such limitations that it must be subjected to the imperial control of
the objective mind, which alone is endowed with the power to reason by
all methods.

To sum up in a few words: To believe in the reality of subjective
visions is to give the subjective mind control of the dual mental
organization; and to give the subjective mind such control is for
Reason to abdicate her throne. The suggestions of the subjective mind
then become the controlling power. The result, in its mildest form of
manifestation, is a mind filled with the grossest superstitions,--a
mind which, like the untutored mind of the savage, "sees God in clouds,
and hears him in the wind." Its ultimate form of manifestation is
insanity.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 7: Scott's poems are good illustrations. They are not ranked
as first class for the sole reason that they are too objective.]

[Footnote 8: Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table.]

[Footnote 9: Philosophy of Mystery, p. 93.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

PERCEPTION OF THE FIXED LAWS OF NATURE.

    Three Sub-classes of Mental Phenomena.--Mathematical
    Prodigies.--Musical Prodigies.--Measurement of Time.--Distinction
    between Results of Objective Education and Intuitive
    Perception.--Zerah Colburn, the Mathematical Prodigy.--The
    Lightning Calculator.--Blind Tom, the Musical Prodigy.--The
    Origin and Uses of Music.--East Indian Fakirs.--Measurement
    of Time.--The Power possessed by Animals.--Illustrative
    Incidents.--Hypnotic Subjects.--Jouffroy's Testimony.--Bernheim's
    Views.--Practical Observations.--The Normal Functions of Objective
    Intelligence.--The Limitations of Subjective Intelligence pertain
    to its Earthly State only.--Its Kinship to God demonstrated by its
    Limitations.--Omniscience cannot reason inductively.--Induction is
    Inquiry.--Perception the Attribute of Omniscience.--Conclusions
    regarding the Power of the Soul.


There are three other sub-classes of subjective mental phenomena which
must be grouped by themselves, inasmuch as they are governed by a
law which does not pertain to the classes mentioned in the preceding
chapter, although there are some characteristics which are common to
them all. The first of these classes of phenomena is manifested in
mathematical prodigies; the second in musical prodigies; and the third
pertains to the measurement of time.

The important distinction to be observed between the phenomena
described in the preceding chapter and those pertaining to mathematics,
music, and the measurement of time, consists in the fact that in the
former everything depends upon objective education, whilst the latter
are apparently produced by the exercise of inherent powers of the
subjective mind.

In order not to be misunderstood it must be here stated that on all
subjects of human knowledge not governed by fixed laws, the subjective
mind is dependent for its information upon objective education.
In other words, it knows only what has been imparted to it by and
through the objective senses or the operations of the objective mind.
Thus, its knowledge of the contents of books can only be acquired by
objective methods of education. Its wonderful powers of acquiring and
assimilating such knowledge are due to its perfect memory of all that
has been imparted to it by objective education, aided by its powers
of memory and of logical arrangement of the subject-matter. Leaving
clairvoyance and thought-transference out of consideration for the
present, the principle may be stated thus: The subjective mind cannot
know, by intuition, the name of a person, or a geographical location,
or a fact in human history. But it does know, by intuition, that two
and two make four.

No one without an objective education can, by the development of the
subjective faculties alone, become a great poet, or a great artist,
or a great orator, or a great statesman. But he may be a great
mathematician or a great musician, independently of objective education
or training, by the development of the subjective faculties alone.
Many facts are on record which demonstrate this proposition. Hundreds
of instances might be cited showing to what a prodigious extent the
mathematical and musical faculties can be developed in persons, not
only without objective training, but, in some instances, without a
brain capable of receiving any considerable objective education.

Mathematical prodigies of the character mentioned are numerous; one
of the most remarkable was the famous Zerah Colburn. The following
account of his early career, published when he was yet under eight
years of age, is taken from the "Annual Register" of 1812, an English
publication, and will serve to illustrate the proposition:

    "The attention of the philosophical world has been lately attracted
    by the most singular phenomenon in the history of human mind that
    perhaps ever existed. It is the case of a child, under eight years
    of age, who, without any previous knowledge of the common rules of
    arithmetic, or even of the use and power of the Arabic numerals,
    and without having given any attention to the subject, possesses,
    as if by intuition, the singular faculty of solving a great variety
    of arithmetical questions by the mere operation of the mind, and
    without the usual assistance of any visible symbol or contrivance.

    "The name of the child is Zerah Colburn, who was born at Cabut
    (a town lying at the head of the Onion River, in Vermont, in the
    United States of America), on the 1st of September, 1804. About two
    years ago,--August, 1810,--although at that time not six years of
    age, he first began to show these wonderful powers of calculation
    which have since so much attracted the attention and excited the
    astonishment of every person who has witnessed his extraordinary
    abilities. The discovery was made by accident. His father, who had
    not given him any other instruction than such as was to be obtained
    at a small school established in that unfrequented and remote
    part of the country, and which did not include either writing
    or ciphering, was much surprised one day to hear him repeating
    the products of several numbers. Struck with amazement at the
    circumstance, he proposed a variety of arithmetical questions to
    him, all of which the child solved with remarkable facility and
    correctness. The news of the infant prodigy was soon circulated
    through the neighborhood, and many persons came from distant parts
    to witness so singular a circumstance. The father, encouraged by
    the unanimous opinion of all who came to see him, was induced to
    undertake with this child the tour of the United States. They were
    everywhere received with the most flattering expressions, and in
    several towns which they visited, various plans were suggested to
    educate and bring up the child free from all expense to his family.
    Yielding, however, to the pressing solicitations of his friends,
    and urged by the most respectable and powerful recommendations, as
    well as by a view to his son's more complete education, the father
    has brought the child to this country, where they arrived on the
    12th of May last; and the inhabitants of this metropolis have for
    the last three months had an opportunity of seeing and examining
    this wonderful phenomenon, and verifying the reports that have
    been circulated respecting him. Many persons of the first eminence
    for their knowledge in mathematics, and well known for their
    philosophical inquiries, have made a point of seeing and conversing
    with him, and they have all been struck with astonishment at his
    extraordinary powers. It is correctly true, as stated of him, that
    he will not only determine with the greatest facility and despatch
    the exact number of minutes or seconds in any given period of
    time, but will also solve any other question of a similar kind.
    He will tell the exact product arising from the multiplication of
    any number consisting of two, three, or four figures by any other
    number consisting of the like number of figures; or any number
    consisting of six or seven places of figures being proposed, he
    will determine with equal expedition and ease all the factors of
    which it is composed. This singular faculty consequently extends
    not only to the raising of powers, but to the extraction of the
    square and cube roots of the number proposed, and likewise to the
    means of determining whether it is a prime number (or a number
    incapable of division by any other number); for which case there
    does not exist at present any general rule amongst mathematicians.
    All these and a variety of other questions connected therewith are
    answered by this child with such promptness and accuracy (and in
    the midst of his juvenile pursuits) as to astonish every person who
    has visited him.

    "At a meeting of his friends, which was held for the purpose of
    concerting the best methods of promoting the views of the father,
    this child undertook and completely succeeded in raising the
    number 8 progressively up to the sixteenth power. And in naming
    the last result, viz., 281,474,976,710,656! he was right in every
    figure. He was then tried as to other numbers consisting of one
    figure, all of which he raised (by actual multiplication, and
    not by memory) as high as the tenth power, with so much facility
    and despatch that the person appointed to take down the results
    was obliged to enjoin him not to be so rapid. With respect to
    numbers consisting of two figures, he would raise some of them to
    the sixth, seventh, and eighth power, but not always with equal
    facility; for the larger the products became, the more difficult he
    found it to proceed. He was asked the square root of 106,929; and
    before the number could be written down, he immediately answered,
    327. He was then required to name the cube root of 268,336,125; and
    with equal facility and promptness he replied, 645. Various other
    questions of a similar nature, respecting the roots and powers
    of very high numbers, were proposed by several of the gentlemen
    present, to all of which he answered in a similar manner. One of
    the party requested him to name the factors which produced the
    number 247,483: this he immediately did by mentioning the numbers
    941 and 263,--which, indeed, are the only two numbers that will
    produce it. Another of them proposed 171,395, and he named the
    following factors as the only ones, viz., 5 � 34,279, 7 � 24,485,
    59 � 2,905, 83 � 2,065, 35 � 4,897, 295 � 581, and 413 � 415. He
    was then asked to give the factors of 36,083; but he immediately
    replied that it had none,--which in fact was the case, as 36,083
    is a prime number. Other numbers were indiscriminately proposed
    to him, and he always succeeded in giving the correct factors,
    except in the case of prime numbers, which he discovered almost as
    soon as proposed. One of the gentlemen asked him how many minutes
    there were in forty-eight years; and before the question could be
    written down he replied, 25,228,800; and instantly added that the
    number of seconds in the same period was 1,513,728,000. Various
    questions of the like kind were put to him, and to all of them he
    answered with equal facility and promptitude, so as to astonish
    every one present, and to excite a desire that so extraordinary a
    faculty should, if possible, be rendered more extensive and useful.
    It was the wish of the gentlemen present to obtain a knowledge of
    the method by which the child was enabled to answer with so much
    facility and correctness the questions thus put to him; but to all
    their inquiries on the subject (and he was closely examined on this
    point) he was unable to give them any information. He persistently
    declared (and every observation that was made seemed to justify
    the assertion) that he did not know how the answer came into his
    mind. In the act of multiplying two numbers together, and in the
    raising of powers, it was evident, not only from the motion of his
    lips, but also from some singular facts which will be hereafter
    mentioned, that some operations were going forward in his mind; yet
    that operation could not, from the readiness with which the answers
    were furnished, be at all allied to the usual mode of proceeding
    with such subjects; and moreover he is entirely ignorant of the
    common rules of arithmetic, and cannot perform upon paper a simple
    sum in multiplication or division. But in the extraction of roots
    and in mentioning the factors of high numbers, it does not appear
    that any operation can take place, since he will give the answer
    immediately, or in a very few seconds, where it would require,
    according to the ordinary method of solution, a very difficult and
    laborious calculation; and, moreover, the knowledge of a prime
    number cannot be obtained by any known rule.

    "It must be evident, from what has here been stated, that the
    singular faculty which this child possesses is not altogether
    dependent on his memory. In the multiplication of numbers and in
    the raising of powers, he is doubtless considerably assisted by
    that remarkable quality of the mind; and in this respect he might
    be considered as bearing some resemblance (if the difference
    of age did not prevent the justness of the comparison) to the
    celebrated Jedidiah Buxton, and other persons of similar note. But
    in the extraction of the roots of numbers and in determining their
    factors (if any), it is clear to all those who have witnessed the
    astonishing quickness and accuracy of this child that the memory
    has nothing to do with the process. And in this particular point
    consists the remarkable difference between the present and all
    former instances of an apparently similar kind."

The latter remark above quoted would not apply to the present day, for
many parallel cases have been reported within the present decade.

It was hoped that the powers of this child would develop by education;
and for this purpose he was placed in school and trained in objective
methods of mathematical calculation. It was believed that when his
mind became mature he would be able to impart to others the process
by which his calculations were made. But his friends were doomed to
disappointment. His powers did not improve by objective training. On
the contrary, they deteriorated just in proportion to his efforts
in that direction, and his pupils derived no benefit from the
extraordinary faculties with which he was endowed. This has been the
invariable rule in such cases.

A few years ago a gentleman travelled through this country teaching
arithmetic. He was known as the "lightning calculator." His powers were
indeed marvellous. He could add a column of as many numbers as could
be written on a sheet of legal cap, by casting an instantaneous glance
upon the page; but he succeeded no better as a teacher than thousands
of others who could not add a column of numbers without reading every
figure by the usual laborious, objective process. He could give no
explanation of his powers other than that he possessed extraordinary
quickness of vision. But any one who is sufficiently acquainted with
the elements of optical laws to be aware that in the light of a flash
of lightning a drop of falling rain appears to be suspended motionless
in the air, knows that objective vision is not capable of such rapid
transition as to enable one to see at a glance each particular figure
in a column of a hundred numbers. When to this is added the labor
of calculating the relation and aggregate values of the numbers,
the conclusion is inevitable that such powers are not given to our
objective senses, but must be inherent in the human soul, and beyond
the range of objective explanation or comprehension.

Musical prodigies furnish further illustrations of the principle
involved. Of these the most remarkable is the negro idiot, known
as Blind Tom. This person was not only blind from birth, but was
little above the brute creation in point of objective intelligence or
capacity to receive objective instruction. Yet his musical capacity
was prodigious. Almost in his infancy it was discovered that he could
reproduce on the piano any piece of music that he had ever heard. A
piece of music, however long or difficult, once heard, seemed to be
fixed indelibly in his memory, and usually could be reproduced with
a surprising degree of accuracy. His capacity for improvisation was
equally great, and a discordant note rarely, if ever, marred the
harmony of his measures.

These well known facts of Blind Tom's history furnish complete
illustrations,--first of the perfection of subjective memory; and
second, of the inherent power of the subjective mind to grasp the
laws of harmony of sounds; and that, too, independently of objective
education.

Music belongs to the realm of the subjective; it is a passion of the
human soul, and it may be safely affirmed that all really good music
is the direct product of the subjective mind. It is true that there is
much so-called music to be heard which is the product of the objective
intelligence. But no one can fail to recognize its origin, from its
hard, mechanical, soulless character and quality. It bears the same
relation to the product of the subjective mind that mere rhyme does
to the poetry of a Milton. Music is at once the legitimate offspring
of the subjective mind and one of the most potent means of inducing
the subjective condition. It is a well-known practice of so-called
"spiritual mediums" to have music at their s�ances, for the ostensible
purpose of securing the "harmonious conditions" necessary to insure a
successful performance. Their theory is that the music harmonizes the
audience, and that by a reflex action the medium is favorably affected.
It is probable that such would be the effect to a limited extent, but
the greatest effect is direct and positive upon the medium.

The East Indian fakirs invariably invoke the aid of music to enable
them to enter the subjective state when they are about to give an
exhibition of occult power. In fact, the power of music over the
subjective mind is practically unlimited. It speaks the universal
language of the soul, and is comprehended alike by prince and by
peasant. It is the most powerful auxiliary of love, of religion, and of
war. It nerves the soldier to deeds of heroism, and soothes his dying
moments. It inspires alike the devotee of pleasure and the worshipper
of God. But whilst it interprets every human emotion and embodies the
inward feelings of which all other arts can but exhibit the outward
effect, its laws are as fixed and immutable as the laws of mathematics.

The next subdivision or branch of the subject pertains to the faculty
of measuring the lapse of time. This power is inherent in the
subjective mind, and in that alone; the objective mind, _per se_,
does not possess it. The only means by which the objective mind can
measure time is by the exercise of the physical senses, either in the
observation of the motions of the heavenly bodies, or of some other
physical object or phenomenon which objective experience has shown to
be a safe criterion upon which to base an estimate.

The subjective mind, on the other hand, possesses an inherent power
in that direction, independent of objective aids or the exercise
of reason. It is possessed by man in common with many of the brute
creation. It is strikingly exhibited in dogs, horses, and other
domestic animals accustomed to regular hours of employment.

A friend of the writer once owned a large plantation in one of the
Southwestern States, upon which he worked a large number of mules.
They were regularly employed on week-days, but on Sundays they were
turned into a corral and allowed to rest. On regular work-days they
were tractable and easily handled; but if one was wanted for a Sunday
excursion it was with the greatest difficulty that he could be caught
or made to perform any labor whatever.

An English gentleman, well known to the writer, relates a curious
anecdote of a dog which was raised in his family. After the dog had
come to maturity, one of the sons married and set up an establishment
about three miles from the parental mansion. It was the habit of the
family to see that the dog was fed regularly, immediately after each
meal, with the scraps from the table. At the home mansion the Sunday
dinner-hour was the same as on week-days, but was just two hours
earlier than that adopted at the son's establishment. This fact the
dog by some means became acquainted with, and he never failed to take
advantage of the information. Every Sunday he would wait patiently for
the home dinner; and having finished it, he would promptly take his
departure, and never failed to put in an appearance at the son's house
on time for dinner, where he was sure to be welcomed and entertained as
an honored guest. On week-days the dinner-hour at the two houses was
the same, and consequently he never made a pilgrimage in search of an
extra meal on any day but Sunday.

A favorite mastiff in the family of the writer has taken upon himself
the regulation of the household affairs. He awakens the family in the
morning at a certain hour, and insists upon promptitude in rising. At
precisely twelve o'clock he notifies the family that it is time to feed
the horse, and will give no one any peace until his friend's wants are
supplied. His own meal seems to be a secondary consideration. At three
o'clock he notifies his mistress that it is time to visit the kitchen
and give directions for preparing dinner. It is not because he expects
to be fed at that time, for he is never fed until the family have
dined, two hours later. At nine o'clock he rises from his rug on the
library floor, and insists upon a visit to the kitchen for a lunch. It
is rare that he varies five minutes from the regular hours above noted,
but is generally within a minute.

This power is exhibited in its perfection in hypnotic subjects and in
ordinary sleep. It is that faculty which enables one to awake at an
appointed hour in the night, when, before going to sleep, he has made
a firm resolution to do so. M. Jouffroy, one of the most celebrated
philosophers of France, in speaking of this subject says:--

    "I have this power in perfection, but I notice that I lose it if
    I depend on any one calling me. In this latter case my mind does
    not take the trouble of reasoning the time or of listening to the
    clock. But in the former it is necessary that it do so, otherwise
    the phenomenon is inexplicable. Every one has made or can make this
    experiment."

M. Jouffroy is doubtless mistaken in supposing that the mind is
necessarily employed in watching the clock; for the experiment is just
as successful in the absence of any timepiece. Besides, the fact that
animals possess the faculty shows that it is an inherent attribute of
the subjective mind. It is the lapse of time that is noted by men as
well as by animals, and is wholly independent of artificial methods
or instruments for marking the divisions of time. Every one possesses
this faculty in a greater or less degree, and the subject need not,
therefore, be enlarged upon.

As before intimated, hypnotic subjects possess in a very remarkable
degree the faculty of noting the lapse of time. On this subject
Professor Bernheim[10] says:--

    "If a somnambulist is made to promise during his sleep that he will
    come back on such and such a day, at such and such an hour, he
    will almost surely return on the day and at the hour, although he
    has no remembrance of his promise when he wakes up. I made A say
    that he would come back to me in thirteen days, at ten o'clock in
    the morning. He remembered nothing when he waked. On the thirteenth
    day, at ten o'clock in the morning, he appeared, having come three
    kilometres from his house to the hospital. He had been working in
    the foundries all night, went to bed at six in the morning, and
    woke up at nine with the idea that he had to come to the hospital
    to see me. He told me that he had had no such idea on the preceding
    days, and did not know that he had to come to see me. It came into
    his head just at the time when he ought to carry it out."

It is also well known to all hypnotists that subjects in a hypnotic
sleep will awaken at any hour prescribed to them by the operator,
seldom varying more than five minutes from the time set, even when the
sleep is prolonged for hours. If the subject is commanded to sleep,
say, ten or fifteen minutes, he will generally awaken exactly on
time. This fact also is universally recognized by those familiar with
hypnotic phenomena, and the subject need not be further illustrated.

In concluding this chapter, it is impossible to refrain from indulging
in a few general observations regarding the conclusions derivable from
the peculiar characteristics of the subjective intelligence thus far
noted. We have seen that certain phenomena depend for their perfect
development upon objective education, and that certain other phenomena
are exhibited in perfection independent of objective education.
In other words, certain powers are inherent in the subjective
intelligence. These powers appear to pertain to the comprehension of
the laws of Nature. We have seen that, under certain conditions, the
subjective mind comprehends by intuition the laws of mathematics. It
comprehends the laws of harmony of sounds, independently of objective
education. By true artists the laws of the harmony of colors are also
perceived intuitively.[11] These facts have been again and again
demonstrated. It would seem, therefore, to be a just conclusion that
the subjective mind, untrammelled by its objective environment, will be
enabled to comprehend all the laws of Nature, to perceive, to know all
truth, independent of the slow, laborious process of induction.

We are so accustomed to boast of the "god-like reason" with which man
is endowed, that the proposition that the subjective mind--the soul--of
man is incapable of exercising that function, in what we regard as the
highest form of reasoning, seems, at first glance, to be a limitation
of the intellectual power of the soul, and inconsistent with what we
have been accustomed to regard as the highest attributes of human
intelligence. But a moment's reflection will develop the fact that this
apparent limitation of intellectual power is, in reality, a god-like
attribute of mind. God himself cannot reason inductively. Inductive
reasoning presupposes an inquiry, a search after knowledge, an effort
to arrive at correct conclusions regarding something of which we are
ignorant. To suppose God to be an inquirer, a seeker after knowledge,
by finite processes of reasoning, is a conception of the Deity which
negatives his omniscience, and measures Infinite Intelligence by purely
finite standards. For our boasted "god-like reason" is of the earth,
earthy. It is the noblest attribute of the finite mind, it is true,
but it is essentially finite. It is the outgrowth of our objective
existence. It is our safest guide in the walks of earthly life. It
is our faithful monitor and guardian in our daily struggle with our
physical environment. It is our most reliable auxiliary in our efforts
to penetrate the secrets of Nature, and wrest from her the means of
subsistence. But its functions cease with the necessities which called
it into existence; for it will be no longer useful when the physical
form has perished, and the veil is lifted which hides from mortal eyes
that world where all truth is revealed. Then it is that the soul--the
subjective mind--will perform its normal functions, untrammelled by
the physical form which imprisons it and binds it to earth, and in its
native realm of truth, unimpeded by the laborious processes of finite
reasoning, it will imbibe all truth from its Eternal Source.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 10: Suggestive Therapeutics, p. 37.]

[Footnote 11: It must be here remarked that although the laws
pertaining to the harmony of colors may be comprehended by intuition,
yet an objective education is necessary to enable the artist to
combine the necessary pigments to produce the colors on canvas, and to
perform the other mechanical labor necessary to place the paints upon
the canvas in such relations as to produce a picture. When this is
acquired, intuition will do the rest.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII.

EFFECTS OF ADVERSE SUGGESTION.

    The Subjective Mind Incapable of Controversial Argument.--A
    Sceptical Audience demoralizes it.--The Presence of an
    Avowed Sceptic prevents Successful Exhibition of Subjective
    Phenomena.--Labouchere and Bishop.--The Royal Academy of
    Medicine.--Its Offer to Clairvoyants.--Failure to earn
    Reward.--Harmonious Conditions required by Spiritists.--The Seybert
    Commission.--Trance-Speaking Mediums.--How demoralized.--Adverse
    Suggestion the Cause of Failure in All Cases.--Possible
    Lack of Telepathic Conditions in Bishop's Case.--General
    Conclusions.--Failure Consistent with Honesty of Mediums.


Another important peculiarity of the subjective mind is that it is
incapable of controversial argument. This subject has been briefly
alluded to in a former chapter; but it is of so much importance that a
more extended consideration of it is demanded, inasmuch as it affords
a clear explanation of various phenomena which have never yet been
satisfactorily accounted for. It is well known among hypnotists that it
is very difficult, if not impossible, to make satisfactory experiments
with a subject in the presence of a sceptical audience. Especially
is this true if the scepticism is open, avowed, and aggressive.
It is also well known that, when a subject is in a state of lucid
somnambulism, no satisfactory results can be obtained if any one
disputes him, or attempts an argument, or accuses him of shamming, or
of a want of good faith. Such a course always results in great distress
of mind on the part of the subject, and generally in restoring him
to normal consciousness. In the higher phases of hypnotic phenomena
this peculiarity is still more marked. In exhibiting the phenomena of
clairvoyance and thought-transference, or mind-reading, it is next to
impossible to obtain good results in the presence of an avowed sceptic.
The controversy between Washington Irving Bishop and Mr. Labouchere is
fresh in the minds of most readers. Mr. Bishop was giving successful
exhibitions of his wonderful powers in public assemblies and in private
circles in London. He had demonstrated again and again his power to
read the thoughts of others and to decipher the contents of sealed
envelopes under the strictest test conditions, in the presence of many
competent and trustworthy observers. In the height of his success Mr.
Labouchere came out in his paper and denounced the whole thing as a
humbug. To prove his sincerity he placed a Bank of England note for a
large amount in a sealed envelope, and offered to give it to Mr. Bishop
if he should correctly read the number. Repeated trials to do so ended
in dismal failure. It was a feat that he had successfully performed a
thousand times before, and many times afterwards. But the number on
that particular bank-note he never could decipher.

In 1831 the Royal Academy of Medicine of France appointed a commission
to investigate the subject of animal magnetism. The commission was
composed of some of the ablest scientists of the Academy, and it
prosecuted its investigations until 1837, when it made its report.
Amongst other things it announced that it had demonstrated the fact
that some mesmeric subjects possessed clairvoyant power; that such
subjects could, with their eyes "exactly closed by the fingers,"
distinguish objects, tell the color and number of cards, and read lines
of a book opened at a chance page. Without entering into the details
of the controversy that followed this report, it is sufficient to say
that a standing offer of a large sum of money was made to any one who
should demonstrate the reality of clairvoyant power in the presence of
a committee appointed for the purpose. It is said that many attempts
have been made by good clairvoyants to earn this money, but every
attempt has ended in total failure. Volumes might be written detailing
such tests and such failures.

Exhibitions of the phenomena of spiritism are constantly liable to
utter failure in the presence of avowed sceptics. Every one who has
attended a "spiritual" s�ance is aware of the strict regard paid
to securing "harmonious conditions;" and all know how dismal is
the failure when such conditions cannot be obtained. It frequently
happens that some one will inadvertently remark that "spirits never
come when I am around;" and in nine such cases out of ten the s�ance
will end in failure when such a remark is made. Any argument against
spiritism, especially if addressed to the medium, or any controversy on
the subject in his presence, will destroy all chance of a successful
exhibition. Investigating committees nearly always fail to observe the
promised phenomena when the character and objects of the committee
are known to the medium. Thus, the Seybert Commission, a majority of
whose members were pronounced sceptics, utterly failed to witness any
phenomena which might not be produced by legerdemain. In their report
they take occasion to say:--

    "Our experience has been ... that as soon as an investigation,
    worthy of the name, begins, all manifestations of spiritist power
    cease.... Even the very spirit of investigation, or of incredulity,
    seems to exercise a chilling effect and prevents a successful
    manifestation."[12]

It will be observed that the last sentence betrays the fact that
the writer regards "the spirit of investigation" and "the spirit of
incredulity" as synonymous terms. It is certain that the Seybert
Commission as a body did so regard them, and made no effort to conceal
the fact from the mediums who submitted to be examined. Every medium
whom they examined was made fully aware of the incredulity of the
majority of the Commission, and thus every effort to produce the
phenomena failed.

The same peculiarity is observed in trance-speaking mediums, especially
in those who speak in a purely subjective condition. No matter how
great is their flow of eloquence, or how perfect their command of
their subject, they utterly break down when confronted by an adverse
argument. So well is this peculiarity known that their friends never
suffer them to be interrupted.

It would be useless to multiply instances of this character. It is
sufficiently evident from what has been said that one invariable result
follows the one condition. In the investigation of physical phenomena
the scientific observer would not hesitate to concede that where a
marked result invariably follows a given condition, the two must
sustain towards each other the relation of cause and effect. It will
not be difficult to establish that relation in this case; and that,
too, on principles consistent with the supposition of the absolute
integrity of all concerned.

It is, in fact, but another striking illustration of the fundamental
principles laid down in preceding chapters of this book. It
demonstrates more completely than almost any other phenomenon the
absolute amenability of the subjective mind to the power of suggestion.
It will not be gainsaid that all the phenomena mentioned--clairvoyance,
thought-transference, hypnotism, and mediumship--are embraced under the
one generic title, subjective or hypnotic; they are therefore governed
by the same general laws.

The hypnotic subject who is in the presence of an openly sceptical
audience, and who hears some one declare that the subject is shamming,
instantly seizes upon the declaration; and it is to him a suggestion
that is as potent as the one which induced the hypnotic condition.
The suggestion of the operator is thus neutralized, so to speak, by a
counter-suggestion, which reduces the subject at once to his normal
condition. In such a case the subject cannot be again hypnotized
so long as the sceptic is present; his very presence is a standing
suggestion of the unreality of the hypnotic condition which cannot be
overcome by the operator.

In the case of Bishop, the mind-reader, the same principle applies with
equal force. The mental state which enabled him to read the contents
of a sealed envelope was self-induced. It was a partially hypnotic
condition, induced by auto-suggestion. When Labouchere's envelope
was presented to him, the very manner of presenting it--the offer of
its contents as a gift if he would read the number of the bank-note
within--was a defiance of his power. It was a suggestion of the most
emphatic character and potency that, do what he would, he could not
read the contents of that envelope. Again, the anxiety engendered in
the mind of the clairvoyant was another factor which added force to the
suggestion. The offer was not only defiant, it was even public. The
whole civilized world was apprised of the controversy. The professional
reputation of the man was at stake. His future career depended upon his
success; and every dollar of value in that note not only added to his
anxiety to win the prize, but contributed its force to the suggestion
that he could not succeed.

There is, however, another factor which should be considered in
Bishop's case, and which may account for his failure on other grounds
than adverse suggestion. Bishop was a professional mind-reader, and,
as I understand it, did not profess to have independent clairvoyant
powers. If, therefore, no one knew the number of the bank-note, it
is obvious that failure was inevitable, for the reason that the
fundamental conditions of success were absent. There was no mind in
possession of the number, and there was no mind to read. It was,
therefore, not a fair test of his professed powers in any view of the
case. But if Labouchere did know the number of the note, the failure
was easily accounted for, as before remarked, on the principle of
adverse suggestion.

It is obvious that the principle of adverse suggestion applies to all
phases and conditions of subjective mental activity; and the necessity
for harmonious conditions, so constantly insisted upon by spiritists
as a condition precedent to the production of their peculiar forms of
hypnotic phenomena, is seen to be a scientific fact of immense value
and significance, and not a mere subterfuge to enable them to practice
a fraud and impose on the credulity of their auditors.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 12: Seybert Commission, Report, p. 15.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII.

HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM.

    Warfare of the Schools.--History of the Science.--Mesmer's
    Career.--The Academicians.--The Successors of Mesmer.--The Royal
    Academy of Medicine.--Its Idiotic Prejudices.--Dr. Braid's
    Discovery.--Re-baptism of the Science.--Effects of Braid's
    Discoveries.--Li�bault's Theory of Suggestion.--The Nancy School
    and the Paris School compared.--The Fluidic Theory.--The Law
    of Suggestion the Greatest Discovery in Psychic Science.--The
    Significance of Braid's Discoveries not Appreciated.--Hypnotism of
    Animals.--The Charcot School.--The Sources of its Errors.--Reform
    in Terminology suggested.--The Mesmeric Theory.--Braid's
    Processes not productive of Higher Phenomena--Mesmerization of
    Animals.--Recapitulation of Points.


Thus far little has been said regarding the light which has been shed
upon the subject under consideration by the discoveries of modern
science. The more important of these discoveries having resulted from
investigations of the subject of hypnotism, it will be necessary
briefly to review the more salient features of that science, and to
trace its progress from the time of Mesmer down to the present day.

Since the time when Mesmer first brought his discoveries to the
attention of the scientific world the students of the phenomena which
he evoked have been hopelessly at variance. That they should entertain
diverse theories regarding the cause of phenomena so strange and full
of mystery is natural. That they should, in the absence of knowledge of
the subject, abuse and vilify each other because of their differences
of opinion, was to be expected. Hatred of our neighbor because his
problematical theories do not agree with our undemonstrable hypotheses
is, unfortunately, one of the salient weaknesses of human nature.

It is, however, comparatively rare that scientific investigators
disagree regarding the demonstrable facts pertaining to a subject
under investigation. Yet this is the condition in which we find the
science of hypnotism after more than a century of research by some of
the ablest scientists of the world. They are divided into schools,
to-day, as they were in the infancy of the science. Indeed, the science
is still in its infancy. Facts have accumulated, it is true; and they
will be found to be of infinite advantage to some future investigator
whose mind is capable of rising above the prejudices which characterize
the different schools, and of assimilating and harmonizing their
demonstrated facts into one comprehensive system.

Thus far the different schools have distrusted or denied each other's
facts, and waged war upon each other's theories. The most carefully
conducted experiments of one school will, in the hands of the other,
produce opposite results. Hence each experimenter is irresistibly led
to distrust the scientific accuracy of the methods employed by others,
or to admit their integrity only at the expense of their intelligence.
In the mean time each school has conducted its experiments seemingly
by the most rigid scientific methods and with conscientious fidelity
to truth; but the results of each apparently disprove the conclusions
of all the others. Hence it is that, in the bibliography of hypnotism,
we find an immense mass of well-authenticated facts which, tried
by the standards of any one of the different schools, appears like
an appalling hodge-podge of falsehood and delusion, chicanery and
superstition. Indeed, no other science, since the dawn of creation,
has suffered so much at the hands of ignorance and superstition as
the science under discussion. Its ancient history is the record of
the supernatural in all the nations of the earth. Its phenomena have
been the foundation of all the religions and all the superstitions of
ancient times. Its modern history has also been largely a record of
superstitious belief, fostered by chicanery and ignorance; the nature
of the phenomena being such that in the hands alike of honest ignorance
and conscious fraud they may be made to sanction every belief, confirm
every dogma, and foster every superstition. It was these facts which
drove scientific men from the field of investigation in the early
modern history of the science. Mesmer himself, in the light of modern
knowledge of the subject, is apt to be accused of charlatanism;
but, as we shall see further on, he is entitled, in common with all
investigators, to the largest measure of charity.

As before remarked, the facts of hypnotism obtained by the
experimenters of the different schools appear to contradict each
other. This, however, is obviously only an apparent contradiction, for
it is axiomatic that no one fact in Nature is inconsistent with any
other fact. It follows that there must be some underlying principle or
principles, heretofore overlooked, which will harmonize the facts. It
is the purpose of this chapter to outline a few fundamental principles
which, properly understood, will enable the student of hypnotism to
reconcile many seeming inconsistencies. An understanding of the salient
points of difference between the various schools can best be conveyed
by briefly outlining the modern history of the science.

Mesmer is entitled to the credit of having first brought the subject to
the attention of the scientific world, although probably his attention
was attracted to it by the writings of Paracelsus and Van Helmont. In
the early part of his career he was deeply interested in the study of
astrology, and he fancied that the planets somehow exerted an influence
on the health of human beings. He at first thought that this influence
was electrical, but afterwards referred it to magnetism. At that time
his cures were effected by stroking the diseased bodies with artificial
magnets. He achieved considerable success by such means, and published
a work in 1766 entitled "De Planetarum Influxa." In 1776, however, he
met Gassner, a Catholic priest who had achieved great notoriety by
curing disease by manipulation, without the use of any other means.
Mesmer then threw away his magnets, and evolved the theory of "animal
magnetism." This he held to be a fluid which pervades the universe, but
is most active in the human nervous organization, and enables one man,
charged with the fluid, to exert a powerful influence over another.

Two years after meeting Gassner he went to Paris, and at once threw
that capital into the wildest excitement by the marvellous effects
of his manipulations. He was treated with contumely by the medical
profession; but the people flocked to him, and many wonderful cures
were effected. His methods, in the light of present knowledge, smack
of charlatanism; but that he believed in himself was demonstrated by
his earnest demand for an investigation. This the Government consented
to, and a commission, composed of physicians and members of the Academy
of Sciences, was appointed, of which Benjamin Franklin was a member.
The report admitted the leading facts claimed by Mesmer, but held
that there was no evidence to prove the correctness of his magnetic
fluid theory, and referred the wonderful effects witnessed to the
"imagination" of the patients. Their conclusion was that the subject
was not worthy of further scientific investigation.

It is difficult at this day to conceive by what process of reasoning
that learned body could arrive at such a conclusion. They admitted
the existence of a motive force capable of controlling man's physical
organization, that this force is amenable to control by man, and that
this control is capable of being reduced to an art. Then they proceed
to announce a discovery of their own,--a discovery, by the way, which
turns out to be the most important which modern science had, at that
time, contributed to the solution of the great problem. They discovered
that the phenomena were purely subjective, thereby demonstrating the
power of mind over matter. If they had stopped there, or if they had
concluded that this wonderful force was worthy of the most searching
scientific investigation, they would have been entitled to the
gratitude of all mankind, and the science would have been at once
wrested from the hands of ignorance and empiricism. That they should
content themselves with disproving Mesmer's theory of causation, and,
after having themselves made a discovery of the true cause, should
announce that their own discovery was not worth the trouble of further
investigation, is inexplicable.

Soon after this, Mesmer was driven into exile, followed by the
execrations of a majority of the medical profession, and died in 1815.
He left many disciples, a majority of whom were shallow empirics, and
mesmerism was brought still further into disrepute. There were a few
able and scientific men, however, who still pursued the investigation,
among whom were the Marquis de Puys�gur, Deleuze, and others. These
gentlemen revolutionized the art by first causing their subjects to
sleep by means of gentle manipulation, instead of surrounding them
with mysticism in dimly lighted apartments filled with sweet odors
and the strains of soft and mysterious music, as was the practice of
Mesmer. They developed in their subjects the power of clairvoyance,
and demonstrated it in a thousand ways. They caused them to obey
mental orders as readily as if the orders were spoken. They healed the
sick, caused the lame to walk, and the blind to see. In short, they
so far revived the interest in the subject that the Royal Academy of
Medicine, in France, felt compelled to order a new investigation. This
was done in 1825. A committee was appointed, composed of the ablest
and most cautious scientists in their body. For nearly six years that
committee pursued its investigations, and in 1831 it submitted its
report. It would be tedious to enumerate all the conclusions at which
it arrived. Its principal efforts were directed to the determination
of the therapeutic value of mesmerism. It confirmed much that had
been claimed for it in that respect, and demonstrated the power of
clairvoyance, by indubitable tests. It also confirmed the claim that
persons could be magnetized at a distance as well as by contact,
although there is nothing in the report which shows how far the
possibilities of suggestion were removed in that class of experiments.
Indeed, in deference to truth it must be here remarked that mesmerists
at that time had but a faint and undefined notion of the subtle _r�le_
which suggestion plays in all psychological phenomena. Hence it follows
that in examining the record of experiments in the higher phenomena of
hypnotism we must make due allowance for possible error in all cases
where the nature of the experiments does not preclude the possibility
of suggestion having influenced the result, or where the possibilities
of suggestion have not been intelligently eliminated.

The effect of this report was instantaneous and remarkable. The
advocates of magnetism as a therapeutic agent, and the believers
in the occult features of the phenomena, such as clairvoyance and
thought-transference, had scored a triumph. But it served only to
exasperate the average scientist and to intensify his prejudices.
The Academy refused to dignify the report by printing it, and it
rests to-day in silent oblivion in the manuscript archives of the
institution. Another committee was soon after appointed, headed by a
member who had openly sworn hostility to the doctrine. The result was
what might have been expected. After the examination of two subjects
under circumstances which, in the light of what is now known, rendered
failure inevitable, the committee made a very undignified report,
announcing the failure to produce the occult phenomena promised,
and impugning the intelligence of the former committee. Strange and
illogical as it may seem, the later report, which proved nothing, which
was confined to an announcement of merely negative results, which
simply showed that the committee did not witness certain promised
phenomena, was accepted by the average scientist as containing the
gospel of hypnotism, as against the report of the earlier committee,
which, after five years of laborious research, announced that it had
witnessed the phenomena in question and demonstrated their reality.

For some years subsequent to this the investigation of the subject
was confined to its psychological and therapeutic features; but
every scientist who dabbled in it was tabooed by the majority of his
associates. Many able works were produced on the subject, but none of
them attracted the attention of the academicians until Dr. Braid, of
Manchester, undertook to demonstrate the theory that the hypothetical
magnetic fluid had nothing to do with the production of the phenomena.
Braid discovered that by placing a bright object before the eyes of the
subject, and causing him to gaze upon it with persistent attention,
he could be thrown into the hypnotic sleep, during which many of the
well-known phenomena ascribed to magnetism could be produced. This
seemed to point to the possibility of a physiological explanation of
the subject-matter. It attracted the attention of the scientists,
and thus to Braid belongs the credit of causing the subject to be at
last acknowledged as being within the domain of the exact sciences.
The academicians were now mollified. The pet theory of the mesmerists
appeared to have been demolished. The method was simple and easily
applied. The phenomena of thought-transference could not be produced
by its methods. It promised a physiological explanation; and, best of
all, it had been given a new name. It had received many names before
Braid undertook the task of rechristening it; but, with the exception
of "mesmerism," each was objectionable, because it implied a theory
of causation. The name "mesmerism" was obviously improper, because
Mesmer was neither the discoverer of the force, nor the inventor of the
practical method of evoking it. "Animal magnetism" implied Mesmer's
theory of magnetic currents. "Mental or animal electricity" implied
practically the same theory. "Neurology" indicated the science of
the nervous system. "Patheism" (from the Greek radical signifying
disease or suffering) and "etherology" (which means the science of the
refined part of the atmosphere) were equally meaningless as applied
to the subject. "Psycodunamy" signified the power of the soul; and
"electro-biology" was American, and not to be tolerated. But when
Braid denominated it "hypnotism,"--from the Greek word signifying
sleep,--it was hailed as a compromise sufficiently noncommittal to
entitle it to recognition, and "hypnotism" it will be called until some
academician drags to light the ultimate cause of all things.

Braid has been accorded a great deal of credit for his original
researches and discoveries, but it is questionable whether he has
not been the indirect means of retarding the true progress of the
science. It is a remarkable fact that since his method of hypnotizing
has been generally adopted, the higher phenomena, such as clairvoyance
and thought-transference, have fallen into disrepute, and are now
rarely produced. Indeed, it may be said to be practically a lost art,
considered as a result of hypnotic processes. The cause of this will
receive attention hereafter. Braid could not cause his subjects to obey
his mental orders, and he disbelieved in the power of clairvoyance. He
acknowledged that some of his subjects could tell the shape of what
was "held at an inch and a half from the skin, on the back of the
neck, crown of the head, arm, or hand, or other parts of the body,"
but held that "it is from feeling they do so."[13] He demonstrated the
extreme sensitiveness of one subject by causing her to obey the motion
of a glass funnel held in his hand, at a distance of fifteen feet.[14]
Truly, a remarkable case of "feeling."

Braid is entitled to great credit for the discovery that the hypnotic
state can be induced independently of the presence or co-operation of
another person. Further than that, his work is practically valueless,
for the reason that he never understood the power or influence of
suggestion. It is therefore manifestly impossible to determine the
value of any experiment of his, except in cases the nature of which
precludes the possibility of suggestion being employed, or in cases
where it was expressly eliminated.

Two facts, however, seem to have been demonstrated by his experiments,
both of which are of the utmost importance:

1. That the hypnotic sleep can be induced independently of personal
contact with, or the personal influence of, another.

2. That the sleep can be induced by his method without the aid of
suggestion.

The mistake which his followers have made is in jumping to the
conclusion that because one of the primary conditions of hypnotic
phenomena can be induced without the aid of the magnetic hypothesis,
therefore the magnetic hypothesis is necessarily incorrect. The same
logic would induce a man who for the first time sees a railroad
train in motion to conclude that any other method of locomotion is
impracticable. Braid himself was not so illogical; for he expressly
says that he does not consider the methods identical, but does
"consider the condition of the nervous system induced by both modes to
be analogous."

Another mistake, shared in common by both the modern schools of
hypnotists, is the failure to appreciate the significance of the fact
that by Braid's method the hypnotic condition can be induced without
the aid of suggestion. One school ignores the fact altogether, or
considers it of doubtful verity, and the other regards it merely as
an evidence that suggestion plays a secondary _r�le_ in hypnotic
phenomena. That both are to some extent wrong will appear at the proper
time, as will also the fact of the failure of all the schools to grasp
its real significance.

For some years after the appearance of Braid's book there was but
little, if any, progress made in the science. His methods, however,
were generally adopted, but the value of his discovery was not
appreciated by his own countrymen; and it was not until the Continental
scientists extended his researches that he obtained substantial
recognition. Li�bault was the first to confirm his experiments, and in
1866 he published a work, in which he advanced much that was new in
fact and theory. He was, in fact, the founder of what is now known as
the Nancy school of hypnotism. Many prominent scientists have followed
him, and many able works have been produced, prominent among which
may be mentioned "Suggestive Therapeutics," by Professor Bernheim, and
"Hypnotism," by Albert Moll, of Berlin.

Professor Charcot, of the Paris Salp�tri�re, is also the founder of a
school of hypnotism, which is generally known as the Paris school, or
school of the Salp�tri�re. Charcot's great reputation as a scientist
obtained for him many followers at first, prominent among whom are
Binet and F�r�, whose joint work, entitled "Animal Magnetism," has been
widely read both in Europe and America.

These schools differ widely both in theory and practice, their only
point of union being their utter contempt for the theory and practice
of what must still be known, for want of a better term, as the mesmeric
school.

These three schools represent the grand divisions which it will
be necessary to recognize in the discussion of the subject under
consideration.

The leading points of difference between the three schools may be
briefly stated as follows:--

1. The theory of the Nancy school is that the different physiological
conditions characterizing the hypnotic state are determined by mental
action alone; that the phenomena can best be produced in persons of
sound physical health and perfect mental balance; and that this mental
action and the consequent physical and psychological phenomena are the
result, in all cases, of some form of suggestion.

2. The Paris school holds that hypnotism is the result of an abnormal
or diseased condition of the nerves; that a great number of the
phenomena can be produced independently of suggestion in any form;
that the true hypnotic condition can be produced only in persons whose
nerves are diseased; and that the whole subject is explicable on the
basis of cerebral anatomy or physiology.

3. The mesmerists hold to the fluidic theory of Mesmer: that the
hypnotic condition is induced, independent of suggestion, by passes
made by the operator over the subject, accompanied by intense
concentration of mind and will on the part of the former; that from
him flows a subtle fluid which impinges upon the subject wherever it
is directed, and produces therapeutic or other effects in obedience
to the will of the operator; that these effects can best be produced
by personal contact; but that they can be produced at a distance and
without the knowledge of the subject, and independently of suggestion.

In discussing the merits of these several schools, it is perhaps
superfluous to say that it is self-evident that neither school can be
entirely right. Each presents an array of facts which seems to support
its theory; but as the theories are irreconcilable, and the facts
apparently contradict each other, it follows that some fundamental
principle underlying the whole subject-matter has been overlooked. It
is the purpose of this book to suggest a possible way to the discovery
of the principle,--the missing link which will unite the chain and bind
the facts of psychological science into one harmonious whole.

The Nancy school of hypnotism is entitled to the credit of having made
the most important discovery in psychological science. The fact that
the subjective mind is constantly amenable to control by the power of
suggestion, constitutes the grand principle in psychological science,
which, when properly appreciated and applied, will solve every problem
and illuminate every obscurity in the labyrinthian science of the
human soul, so far as it will ever be possible for finite intelligence
to penetrate it. It is safe to say that in all the broad realm of
psychological science there is not a phenomenon upon which it will not
shed light. It is no discredit to that school to say that its leaders
and teachers do not yet seem to comprehend the profound significance of
their discovery, and that in one direction they have extended it too
far. It is the latter proposition which will first receive attention.

They hold, very correctly, that all the phenomena of hypnotism,
subsequent to the induction of the hypnotic condition, are due to
the power of suggestion in some form. That this is true, admits of
no possible doubt. They also find by experiment that the hypnotic
condition can be induced simply by the power of suggestion. Their
conclusion is that suggestion is a necessary factor in the induction
of the hypnotic condition. That this is not true can be very readily
demonstrated by reference to a few well-known and admitted facts. One
of the first discoveries made by Braid was that by his methods the
hypnotic condition could be induced in persons who had never seen or
heard of hypnotic phenomena.

The following passage from that learned author seems to have been
overlooked by those of his commentators who seek for evidence in his
experiments to prove that suggestion is a necessary factor in the
induction of the hypnotic condition:--

    "In order to prove my position still more clearly, I called up
    one of my men-servants, who knew nothing of mesmerism, and gave
    him such directions as were calculated to impress his mind with
    the idea that his fixed attention was merely for the purpose of
    watching a chemical experiment in the preparation of some medicine,
    and being familiar with such, he could feel no alarm. In two
    minutes and a half his eyelids closed slowly with a vibrating
    motion, his chin fell on his breast, he gave a deep sigh, and
    instantly was in a profound sleep, breathing loudly.... In about
    one minute after his profound sleep I aroused him and pretended
    to chide him for being so careless, said he ought to be ashamed
    of himself for not being able to attend to my instructions for
    three minutes without falling asleep, and ordered him downstairs.
    In a short time I recalled this young man, and desired him to sit
    down once more, but to be careful not to go to sleep again, as
    on the former occasion. He sat down with this intention; but at
    the expiration of two minutes and a half his eyelids closed, and
    exactly the same phenomena as in the former experiment ensued."[15]

Now, whilst it is true that Braid did not realize the supreme potency
of suggestion as it is now understood by the Nancy school, he did
intelligently eliminate it in the experiment above related. It was his
purpose to demonstrate his theory that "the phenomena of mesmerism were
to be accounted for on the principle of a derangement of the state of
the cerebro-spinal centres, and of the circulatory and respiratory and
muscular systems."[16] In other words, he was seeking to demonstrate
his theory that the phenomena of mesmerism are attributable to a
physical rather than a mental cause. Hence his care to select a subject
who knew nothing of what was expected of him.

Braid relates another circumstance equally demonstrative of the
proposition that suggestion is not a necessary factor in the induction
of the hypnotic state. He says:--

    "After my lecture at the Hanover Square Rooms, London, on the 1st
    of March, 1842, a gentleman told Mr. Walker, who was along with
    me, that he was most anxious to see me, that I might try whether I
    could hypnotize him. He said both himself and friends were anxious
    he should be affected, but that neither Lafontaine nor others who
    had tried him could succeed. Mr. Walker said, 'If that is what
    you want, as Mr. Braid is engaged otherwise, sit down, and I will
    hypnotize you myself in a minute.' When I went into the room, I
    observed what was going on, the gentleman sitting staring at Mr.
    Walker's finger, who was standing a little to the right of the
    patient, with his eyes fixed steadily on those of the latter. I
    passed on and attended to something else; and when I returned a
    little after, I found Mr. Walker standing in the same position,
    _fast asleep, his arm and finger in a state of cataleptiform
    rigidity_, and the patient wide awake and staring at the finger all
    the while."[17]

This is a clear case of the induction of the hypnotic condition
without the aid of suggestion. Mr. Walker had no thought of going
into the state himself, but was intent on hypnotizing the patient.
The suggestion in his mind was, therefore, in the opposite direction.
He had, however, inadvertently placed himself in the proper attitude,
and so concentrated his gaze as to induce the state, and that directly
contrary to his auto-suggestion.

These two instances have been cited from Braid for the reason that
(1) he was the discoverer of the method of hypnotizing by causing the
subject to gaze steadily upon an object; and (2) he was not attempting
to prove or disprove the theory of suggestion. His testimony is
obviously all the more reliable for that reason, for one is prone to
distrust the verity of experiments made for the purpose of sustaining a
theory. Many facts have been recorded which demonstrate the proposition
that by Braid's method the hypnotic state can be induced independently
of suggestion. One class only of such facts needs to be cited to
convince the most sceptical.

I allude to religious devotees, who are often thrown into the hypnotic
state, even to the degree of ecstasy, by gazing upon the crucifix, or
upon pictures of the Holy Virgin or of the saints. The Catholic clergy
would seem to have a dim perception of the principle involved when they
elevate the cross above the eyes of those in whom they wish to excite
devotional enthusiasm. Be that as it may, the fact is of scientific
value to the investigator of psychological phenomena. The natural
attitude of prayer--the eyes raised towards heaven--is certainly not
only conducive to devotional feeling, but, in emotional natures, to a
state at least cognate to hypnotism, if not identical with it. Hence
the subjective hallucinations which often result from the long and
earnest prayers of religious enthusiasts.

More conclusive still is the fact that animals can be hypnotized.
Albert Moll, who is one of the ablest, and certainly one of the most
unprejudiced, of modern scientific writers on the subject of hypnotism,
writing from the standpoint of the Nancy school, makes the following
observations on the subject of hypnotizing animals:--

    "States resembling, or perhaps identical with, hypnosis, are
    also found in animals, and can easily be experimentally induced.
    The first experiments of this kind are referred to by the Jesuit
    Kircher,--the so-called _experimentum mirabile Kircheri_. Kircher
    described these experiments in 1646; but according to Preyer, the
    experiment had been made by Schwenter several years earlier. The
    most striking of these experiments, which are being continued in
    the present day, is as follows: A hen is held down on the ground;
    the head in particular is pressed down. A chalk line is then drawn
    on the ground, starting from the bird's beak. The hen will remain
    motionless. Kircher ascribes this to the animal's imagination;
    he said that it imagined that it was fastened, and consequently
    did not try to move. Czermak repeated the experiment on different
    animals, and announced in 1872 that a hypnotic state could be
    induced in other animals besides the hen. Preyer shortly after
    began to interest himself in the question, and made a series of
    experiments like Czermak's. Preyer, however, distinguishes two
    states in animals,--catalepsy, which is the effect of fear; and the
    hypnotic state. Heubel, Richet, Danilewsky, and Rieger, besides the
    authors mentioned above, have occupied themselves with the question.

    "Most of the experiments have been made with frogs, crayfish,
    guinea-pigs, and birds. I have made many with frogs. This much is
    certain: many animals will remain motionless in any position in
    which they have been held by force for a time. There are various
    opinions as to the meaning of this. Preyer thinks many of these
    states are paralyses from fright, or catalepsy, produced by a
    sudden peripheral stimulus. In any case they vividly recall the
    catalepsy of the Salp�tri�re, also caused by a strong external
    stimulus."[18]

The experiments of Kircher, above mentioned, were undertaken with a
view of demonstrating his theory that animals possessed great powers of
imagination. The chalk mark, he held, represented to the imagination
of the hen a string with which she supposed herself to be bound. In
his day, of course, nothing was known of hypnotism. It has since been
demonstrated that the chalk mark has nothing to do with the production
of the phenomenon. The same result follows when the chalk mark is
omitted. The writer has hypnotized a pet rooster by Braid's method
without using any violence whatever, or even touching the fowl. He was
exceedingly tame, and it was only necessary to hold a small object
directly before his eyes; when his attention was attracted, he would
gaze steadily upon it, and in a very few minutes would go fast asleep.
This could not have been a catalepsy caused by fright, nor could it
have been the result of a belief in his inability to move, nor a
peripheral stimulus caused by friction against the skin, nor could
it have been suggestion. In fact, there is no legitimate conclusion
apparent except that it was a true hypnosis, identical with that
produced on human beings by Braid's methods.

This branch of the subject has been dwelt upon somewhat at length,
not merely for the purpose of showing that the adherents of the Nancy
school carry the doctrine of suggestion too far, but because it is an
important point in the study of the subject, and throws a flood of
light upon many important and perplexing problems, as will be seen
hereafter. The principle to be borne in mind is this: hypnosis can be
produced by Braid's method either with or without the aid of suggestion.

This does not militate in the slightest degree against the doctrine of
suggestion when its powers and limitations are properly understood.
It still remains true that all hypnotic phenomena subsequent to the
induction of the condition are the result of suggestion in some
form. This is the grand discovery of the Nancy school; and when it
is once appreciated and understood, it will be found to constitute
the master-key which will unlock the secrets of every psychological
mystery. That it is unqualifiedly true no longer admits of serious
doubt; it is acknowledged by nearly every scientist in the civilized
world who has given the subject intelligent attention. It is true
that the great name of Charcot has commanded a following; but however
valuable may have been his observations in the infancy of the science,
it has become obvious to most of his former followers that his
fundamental hypothesis is defective, and that his conclusions are
therefore necessarily unreliable.

The discussion of the merits of the Paris school will be brief, and
will be chiefly confined to a statement of the reasons for considering
its experiments and conclusions unreliable, and to pointing out a few
of the more obvious sources of its errors.

The first source of error lies in the fact that the experiments of
this school are made almost exclusively upon hysterical women. The
assumption is that hypnotism is a nervous disease, and that the disease
is found in its most pronounced form in hysterical subjects. That this
proposition is unqualifiedly wrong is positively known to every student
of hypnotism outside the Paris school, and needs no further refutation
than the bare statement that the experience of all other schools goes
to demonstrate the fact that the best hypnotic subjects are perfectly
healthy persons.

Another source of error lies in the fact that they ignore suggestion
as a necessary factor in the production of hypnotic phenomena. Of
course they are aware of the potency of suggestion when purposely
and intelligently employed; but they hold that very many of the most
important of the phenomena can be produced without its aid. These,
however, are principally physical effects, such as causing any muscle
of the body to contract by pressing upon the corresponding nerve, and
then releasing the tension by exciting the antagonistic muscle. The
condition necessary for the production of this phenomenon is called
by Charcot, "neuro-muscular hyperexcitability." In the able and
interesting work by Binet and F�r�, pupils of Charcot, a chapter is
devoted to this branch of the subject. They record, with a scientific
exactitude that is very edifying, many curious results in the way
of causing contracture of various muscles by kneading, pressure,
percussion, etc., releasing the tension by exciting the opposing
muscles, and transferring the contractures from one muscle to another
by the magnet. Then, with an ingenuousness that is truly charming, they
add, as a "singular fact," that "contractures can be easily produced in
many hysterical patients in their waking state, either by kneading the
muscles, by pressure on the nerves, or by striking the tendons. These
contractures in the waking state are, indeed, of the same nature as
those which occur during lethargy, since they yield to the excitement
of the antagonistic muscles, and may be transferred by the magnet."

After this admission it seems superfluous to remark that this class of
experiments prove nothing more than that the state of neuro-muscular
hyperexcitability is a pathological symptom common to hysterical
patients, whether in the waking state or in hypnotic lethargy. They
certainly prove nothing which can be construed as characteristic of
hypnotism; and the Nancy school wastes its time in demonstrating that
the symptoms cannot be reproduced in healthy persons except by the aid
of suggestion.

Another serious error into which the Charcot school has fallen in
its effort to eliminate the effects of suggestion consists in the
assumption that subjects in the lethargic state know nothing of what
is passing around them, either objectively or subjectively. No greater
mistake is possible. _The subjective mind never sleeps._ No matter how
profound the lethargy, it is ever alert, and comprehends instantly,
with preternatural acuteness, everything that occurs. Professor
Bernheim, in the preface to "Suggestive Therapeutics," makes the same
assertion. He says:--

    "One should first be aware of the fact that in all degrees of
    hypnosis the subject hears and understands everything, even
    though he may appear inert and passive. Sometimes the senses are
    particularly sharp in this state of special concentration, as if
    all the nervous activity were accumulated in the organ of which the
    attention is solicited."

The state of lethargy is that in which Charcot supposes his subjects to
be incapable of receiving a suggestion. Acting upon that hypothesis,
it is not astonishing that he should deceive himself as well as the
students and spectators attending his clinic. He believes that they
hear nothing when they hear everything. It is easy to see how every
suggested phenomenon is promptly produced under such conditions.
But there is one phenomenon of which the learned professor fails to
note the significance, and that is, that, no matter how profound the
lethargy, his subject promptly awakens at the word of command.

The simple truth regarding the experiments of the Paris school is in a
nutshell. Its fundamental error lies in the assumption that hypnosis
has a purely physical origin, and that the phenomena are explicable
on physiological principles. The phenomena which can be produced
independently of suggestion are purely physical, and depend upon the
physical condition of neuro-muscular hyperexcitability. That this is
true is shown by the fact that the physical phenomena produced by
Charcot upon his hysterical patients cannot be produced on healthy
subjects without the aid of suggestion. But such experiments do not
properly belong to the domain of psychic science proper, but rather
to the Bradian system of physical manipulation. This is as much as
confessed by Binet and F�r�, when they divulge the fact that the
physical phenomena in question can be produced on hysterical patients
in their waking condition.

Another prolific source of error which besets the pathway of the Paris
school consists in its disbelief in, and consequent disregard of,
the possibility that its subjects may be possessed of clairvoyant or
telepathic powers. That this frequently happens, especially in subjects
of the character employed by Charcot and his coadjutors, admits of no
possible doubt in the minds of those who have studied the higher phases
of hypnotic science. The London Society for Psychical Research has
demonstrated beyond all question the fact that telepathy is a power
possessed by many; and the early mesmerists have shown conclusively
that the hypnotic condition is the one of all others the most favorable
for the development and exhibition of that power. This subject will be
dwelt upon more at length in its proper place. It is sufficient for
present purposes to remark that no line of experiments in hypnotism,
in which telepathy and clairvoyance are ignored as possible factors,
can be held to be demonstrative of any proposition or theory whatever.
But whatever of pathological value or interest may be attached to the
physical phenomena evoked by the Paris school, they certainly shed no
light upon psychological science, nor do they properly belong to that
domain.

And just here I wish to suggest a reform in the nomenclature of the
science under consideration. The word "hypnotism" was adopted by Braid
at a time when he regarded himself as the discoverer of a principle
which embraced the whole science of induced sleep. It is from the
Greek word "hypnos," which broadly signifies sleep. But, without some
qualifying word, it is too broad, inasmuch as the system to which Braid
applied it is now known to be but one of many processes of inducing
sleep. He imagined that he had discovered a full explanation of all
psychic phenomena of the class then known as mesmeric; whereas he
had only discovered the one fact that the sleep could be induced by
producing an abnormal physical condition of certain nerve-centres. It
was a very important discovery, for psychic science would be incomplete
without it; but it does not constitute the whole science. It does,
however, explain many phenomena otherwise inexplicable, and marks a
line of distinction which could not otherwise be drawn. The methods of
the Charcot school are essentially Braidian, and hence its results are
limited largely to physical phenomena, and its conclusions necessarily
pertain to physical science.

The Nancy school, on the other hand, produces all its phenomena by
oral suggestion, and ignores the fact that the sleep can be induced in
the absence of any form of suggestion. It repudiates Braid's method of
inducing it as unnecessary, and also as injurious, in that the physical
disturbance of the nerve-centres unduly excites the patient.

The mesmeric school differs from both the others in methods and theory,
as we shall see further on.

It seems necessary, therefore, that the terminology of the science
should be changed so as clearly to define the theoretical differences
of the three schools. It is obvious, however, that the terminology
cannot be based on results, for they are inextricably intermingled.
Thus, the Braidian or Charcot operator might accidentally produce
psychic phenomena identical with that produced by the mesmerists, and
_vice versa_. And so might the suggestive school. Indeed, the writings
of both schools occasionally betray the fact that they sometimes catch
glimpses of something in their patients which defies chemical analysis,
and cannot be carved with the scalpel.

The terminology must, therefore, refer to the methods of inducing the
subjective state. If the word "hypnotism" is to be retained because it
embraces all degrees of induced sleep by whatsoever process it may have
been induced, it would seem proper to designate the Braidian process
as _physical hypnotism_, the Nancy process as _suggestive hypnotism_,
and the mesmeric process as _magnetic_, or _fluidic_, _hypnotism_.

I merely throw this out as a suggestion to be considered by future
writers on the subject. For my own purposes I shall hereafter employ
the word "hypnotism" to define the Braidian and suggestive processes as
distinguished from all others when these are contrasted, while the word
"mesmerism" will be employed as it is generally understood. When they
are not contrasted, "hypnotism" will be used as a generic term.

Last in the order of mention, but really first in importance, is the
school of mesmerism. The theory of the mesmerists has undergone little,
if any, modification since it was first promulgated by Mesmer himself.
It is, as before stated, that there exists in man a subtle fluid, in
the nature of magnetism, which, by means of passes over the head and
body of the subject, accompanied by intense concentration of mind and
will on the part of the operator, can be made to flow from the ends
of his fingers and impinge upon the subject, producing sleep and all
the varied subsequent phenomena at the will of the operator. In the
early days of mesmerism suggestion was ignored as a possible factor in
the production of the phenomena, this law not having been discovered
previous to the experiments of Li�bault. The same is practically true
to-day. Mesmerism has made very little progress within the last half
century. Its votaries cling to the old theories with a pertinacity
proportioned to the opposition encountered at the hands of the
hypnotists. On the whole, the progress of mesmeric science, _per se_,
has been backward since the discoveries of Braid,--not because Braid
disproved the fluidic theory, for he did not disprove it, nor did he
claim to have done so, but for reasons which will appear in their
proper place.

Suggestion is now, as before the discoveries of Li�bault, ignored
by mesmerists as a necessary factor either in the induction of the
mesmeric condition, or in the production of the subsequent phenomena.
In this they are partly right and partly wrong. Suggestion, in the
ordinary acceptation of the term,--that is, oral suggestion,--is not
an indispensable factor in the induction of the condition. This is
shown in a great variety of ways. One fact alone demonstrates the
principle, and that is, that subjects who have been often mesmerized
by a particular individual can be by him thrown into that state, under
certain favorable conditions, even though the two may be many miles
apart. Account is not taken in this of the many experiments of the old
mesmerists, who previously informed their subjects of the intended
experiment. But many instances might be cited where this has been
accomplished under test conditions, the element of suggestion being
carefully eliminated. The writer has mesmerized a subject at a distance
of three hundred miles, and that under conditions which rendered oral
or objective suggestion impossible. Particular instances will not be
cited here, for the reason that in subsequent chapters of this book the
principle involved will be rendered so plain that further proofs would
be superfluous. A further demonstration of this principle lies in the
fact that children, too young to understand what is expected of them,
and animals of various kinds, can be mesmerized. This is abundantly
proved by the experiments of Wilson, who, as early as 1839, mesmerized
elephants, horses, wolves, and other animals in London. Obersteimer
states that in Austria the law requires army horses to be mesmerized
for the purpose of shoeing them. This process was introduced by a
cavalry officer named Balassa, and hence it has been termed and is now
known as "the _Balassiren_ of horses" (Moll). This is the secret of
the celebrated horse-tamers, Sullivan and Rarey. By their methods the
wildest colts and the most vicious horses could be subdued in an hour.
Mesmerism is the power exerted by the lion-tamer and the snake-charmer.
The power is often exerted unconsciously,--that is, without a knowledge
on the part of the operator of the source of his power.

The mesmerists of the present day are not, of course, ignorant or
unmindful of the potency of suggestion in the production of mesmeric
phenomena subsequent to the induction of the condition. But, like the
Paris school of hypnotists, they hold that suggestion plays a secondary
_r�le_ in the production of many of the phenomena. That they are wrong
in this will more fully appear in subsequent chapters of this book.

The points of difference between the three schools of this science
have now been reviewed, and the theories of each briefly stated. It is
found,--

1. That the Nancy school attributes all the phenomena, including the
induction of the state, to the power of suggestion, and that it is to
the psychic powers and attributes of man alone that we must look for an
explanation.

2. The Paris school, on the other hand, ignores suggestion as a
necessary factor either in the induction of the state or in the
production of subsequent phenomena, and seeks an explanation of the
subject-matter on the bases of physiology and cerebral anatomy.

3. The mesmerists ignore suggestion as a necessary factor at any stage
of their experiments, and explain the whole on the magnetic fluid
theory.

We also find three distinct methods of inducing the sleep; and as it is
of the utmost importance to bear the different methods in mind, they
will be here restated:--

The Nancy school, true to its theory, employs suggestion alone to
induce the condition. Passes are sometimes made over its subjects after
the manner of the mesmerists, but only with a view of giving an air of
mystery to the proceedings, and thus adding potency to the suggestion.

The Paris school employs physical means to induce the state almost
exclusively. They are practically the same as those employed by
Braid, namely, causing the subject to gaze steadily at a bright
object,--although many variations of the method have been introduced,
such as flashing an electric light in the eyes of the subject, striking
a gong without warning close to his ears, or by some peripheral
excitation, such as rubbing the scalp, etc.

The mesmeric method proper consists in making passes from the head
downwards, gazing fixedly into the subject's eyes, and concentrating
the mind upon the work in hand, strongly willing the subject to sleep.
It is true that many of the so-called mesmerists now employ Braid's
method entirely, and others depend largely upon suggestion. But the
true mesmeric method is as has been stated.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: Braid on Hypnotism, p. 37, _note_.]

[Footnote 14: Ibid.]

[Footnote 15: Neurypnology, p. 18.]

[Footnote 16: Neurypnology, p. 19.]

[Footnote 17: Ibid., p. 39.]

[Footnote 18: Moll on Hypnotism, p. 213.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX.

HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM (_continued_).

    Mesmeric Methods.--The Fluidic Theory.--Influence of the Mind
    of the Operator.--The Early Mesmerists.--Their Methods and
    their Effects.--Decadence of the Higher Phenomena under Braid's
    Methods.--The Causes explained.--Telepathic Powers developed
    by Mesmerism.--Mesmerism as a Therapeutic Agent.--Method of
    Operation recommended.--How to acquire the Power.--The Necessary
    Conditions of Success.--Will Power explained.--The Fluidic Theory
    requires Revision.--Distinction between Mesmerism and Hypnotism
    sharply drawn.--Mesmerization of Animals distinguished from the
    Hypnotization of Animals.--Methods employed in Each.--Tamers
    of Horses and Wild Beasts.--Dog-Trainers.--Primitive Man.--His
    Powers.--His Immunity from Harm.--Daniel.--The Adepts.--General
    Conclusions.


That the magnetic hypothesis of the mesmerists has many facts to
sustain it cannot be denied. The experience of thousands goes to show
that when passes are made over them, even at a distance of several
feet, a sensation is felt akin to a gentle shock of electricity, which
produces a remarkably soothing effect upon the nervous system, and
eventually produces the mesmeric sleep. It is also known that when
patients are mesmerized for therapeutic purposes, and passes are made
over the affected part, the same soothing effect is produced, and pain
is relieved. In fact, if we consider mesmerism solely as a therapeutic
agent, and study it from that standpoint alone, the fluidic hypothesis
is perhaps as good as any. But when we come to study mesmeric
phenomena as a part, and only a very small part, of a grand system of
psychological science; when we examine it in its relations to other
phenomena of a cognate character,--it is found that the fluidic theory
should be received with some qualification.

The first thought which strikes the observer is that, admitting the
fluidic theory to be substantially correct, the fluid is directed and
controlled entirely by the mind of the operator. It is well known that
passes effect little or nothing if the attention of the operator is
distracted, from any cause whatever. The subject may be put to sleep,
it is true, solely by the power of suggestion; but the peculiar effects
of mesmerism, as distinguished from those of hypnotism, will be found
wanting. The effects here alluded to consist mainly of the development
of the higher phenomena, such as clairvoyance and telepathy.

It is well known that the early mesmerists constantly and habitually
developed telepathic powers in their subjects. Causing their subjects
to obey mental orders was a common platform experiment half a century
ago. These experiments were often made, under test conditions, by the
most careful and conscientious scientists, and the results are recorded
in the many volumes on the subject written at the time. Many of these
works were written by scientists whose methods of investigation were
painstaking and accurate to the last degree. In the light of the
developments of modern science, in the light of the demonstrations,
by the members of the London Society for the Promotion of Psychical
Research, of the existence of telepathic power, we cannot read the
works of the old mesmerists without having the conviction forced upon
us that telepathy was developed by their experiments to a degree almost
unknown at the present day. Why it is that the power to develop that
phenomenon by mesmerists has been lost or has fallen into desuetude,
is a question of the gravest scientific interest and importance. The
hostility and ridicule of the academicians undoubtedly had its effect
on many minds, and caused many scientific investigators to shrink
from publicly avowing their convictions or the results of their
investigations. But that does not account for the fact that mesmerists,
who believe in the verity of the phenomena, are rarely able to produce
it at the present day.

The first question which presents itself is one of dates. When did
the higher phenomena show the first signs of decadence? A moment's
reflection will fix it at or about the date of the promulgation of the
theories of Dr. Braid. It is a historic fact, well known to all who
have watched the progress of hypnotic science, that as soon as it was
found that the mesmeric or hypnotic sleep could be induced by causing
the subject to gaze upon a bright object held before his eyes, all
other methods were practically abandoned. It was much easier to hold an
object before the subject's eyes for a few minutes, with the mind at
rest, than to make passes over him for an indefinite length of time,
accompanying the passes by fixity of gaze and intense concentration of
mind. The important point to bear in mind right here is the fact that
in the old mesmeric method, fixity of gaze and concentration of will on
the part of the operator, were considered indispensable to success. It
seems clear, then, that it is to this change of methods that we must
look for an explanation of the change in results. That being conceded,
we must inquire how the conditions were changed by the change of
methods. What effects, if any, either in the condition of the subject
or of the operator, or in both, are missing when the new methods are
applied?

It is now necessary to recall to mind the fact (1) that Braid
demonstrated that suggestion is not a necessary factor in the induction
of the hypnotic state; and (2) that steadily gazing upon an object
will induce the condition in a more or less marked degree, whether the
subject is expecting the result or not. The intelligent student will so
readily recall thousands of facts demonstrating this proposition that
it is safe to set it down as an axiom in hypnotic science that intense
gazing upon an object, accompanied by concentration of mind, will
displace the threshold of consciousness to a greater or less extent,
depending upon the mental characteristics of the individual and the
circumstances surrounding him. The subjective powers are thus brought
into play. The subjective mind is released, or elevated above the
threshold of consciousness, and performs its functions independently
of, or synchronously with, the objective mind, just in proportion to
the degree of hypnosis induced. It may be only in a slight degree, it
may be imperceptible to those surrounding him, or it may reach a state
of complete hypnosis, as in the cases mentioned by Braid; but certain
it is that the subjective powers will be evoked in exact proportion to
the degree of causation. The conclusion is obvious and irresistible
that when a mesmerist employs the old methods of inducing the
subjective state,--passes, fixed gazing, and mental concentration,--_he
hypnotizes himself by the same act by which he mesmerizes the subject_.

The far-reaching significance of this fact will be instantly apparent
to those who are aware that telepathy is the normal means of
communication between two subjective minds, and that it is only between
subjective minds that telepathy can be employed. The objective mind
has no part or lot in telepathy until the threshold of consciousness
is displaced so as to enable the objective mind to take cognizance of
the message. It will be understood, therefore, that when the subject is
mesmerized, and all his objective senses are in complete abeyance, and
the operator with whom he is _en rapport_ is in a partially subjective
state, the conditions exist which render possible the exhibition of
telepathic powers.

This is what was meant when it was said in an earlier chapter of this
book that the discoveries of Braid had really served to retard the
progress of hypnotic science; not because his discoveries are not of
the utmost practical value, but because much of their true significance
has been misunderstood. The fact that persons can be hypnotized by his
methods, and that many of the phenomena common to mesmerism can be
produced by that means, is a fact of vast importance; but it is only
one link in the great chain, and not the whole chain, as his followers
would have us believe. The later discovery of the law of suggestion
was also of the most transcendent interest and importance; but it
is not the whole law of psychic science. This, too, has helped to
retard the progress of the science in its higher branches. When it was
discovered that suggestion by itself could induce the hypnotic state,
Braid's methods were in turn abandoned by students of the science.
This was partly because it was easier than Braid's method, and partly
because it produced less physical and mental excitement, and hence, for
therapeutic purposes, was less liable to excite the patient unduly. But
the fact remains that neither by Braidism nor by the suggestive method
can the subject ordinarily be made to respond telepathically. It is
true that there might be exceptions to the rule. If, for instance, the
operator in employing either of the methods should come in physical
contact with the subject, and should at the same time happen to
concentrate his gaze upon some object for a length of time, and fix
his mind upon the work in hand, he would be very likely to come into
telepathic communication with the subject. That this has often happened
there can be no doubt; and it constitutes one of the possible sources
of error which lie in the pathway both of the Paris and the Nancy
schools. It is perhaps superfluous to remark that the higher phenomena
of hypnotism can only be developed with certainty of results by
throwing aside our prejudices against the fluidic theory, and employing
the old mesmeric methods.

In this connection it is deemed proper to offer a few suggestions as to
the best methods to be employed for producing mesmeric effects, either
for therapeutic or for any other purposes.

It is recommended, for several reasons, that the mesmeric passes be
employed. First, they are so generally believed to be necessary that
they greatly assist by way of suggestion. Secondly, they are a great
assistance to the operator, as they enable him more effectually to
concentrate his mind upon the work in hand, and to fix his attention
upon the parts which he desires to affect. Thirdly, they operate as a
suggestion to the operator himself, which is as necessary and as potent
to effect the object sought as is suggestion to the subject. Fourthly,
whether the fluidic theory is correct or not, the power, whatever it
is, appears to flow from the fingers; and, inasmuch as it appears to do
so, the effect, both upon the mind of the operator and of the subject,
is the same as if it were so,--the great _desideratum_ being the
confidence of both.

The most important point to be gained, however, is self-confidence
in the mind of the operator. Without that no greater results can
be produced by mesmeric methods than by the process of simple oral
suggestion. The latter affects the mind of the subject alone, and
all the subsequent effects are due solely to the action of his mind.
Mesmeric methods, on the other hand, if properly applied, supplement
the effects of oral suggestion by a constant force emanating from the
subjective mind of the operator. In order to evoke that force it is
necessary for the operator to inspire his own subjective mind with
confidence. This can be done by the simple process of auto-suggestion.
The power to do this does not depend upon his objective belief. The
power to control subjective belief is inherent in the objective mind;
and that control can be made absolute, even in direct contradiction
to objective belief. If, therefore, the mesmeric operator doubts his
power over his subject, he can, nevertheless, exert all the necessary
force simply by reiterated affirmation to himself that he possesses
that power. This affirmation need not, and perhaps should not, be
uttered aloud. But it should be constantly reiterated mentally while
the passes are being made; and if in addition to this he concentrates
his gaze upon the open or closed eyes of the subject, or upon any part
of the head or face, the effect will be all the more powerful. Whatever
effect is desired should be formulated in the mind of the operator,
and reiterated with persistency until it is produced. The principle
involved is obvious, and easily understood. The subject is passive, and
receptive of subjective mental impressions. The subjective mind of
the operator is charged with faith and confidence by auto-suggestion.
That faith is impressed telepathically upon the subjective mind of the
patient; and even though his objective belief may not coincide with
the subjective impression thus received, the latter obtains control
unconsciously to the subject, and the end is accomplished.

The power to mesmerize by this method is within the reach of any
one with sufficient intelligence to understand the directions, and
sufficient mental balance to follow them with persistency; provided
always the subject is willing to be mesmerized, and is possessed of
the requisite mental equilibrium to enable him to become passive and
receptive.

All mesmerists and all hypnotists agree in holding that self-confidence
is a necessary part of the mental equipment of the successful operator.
This is true. It is also true that the possession of the requisite
confidence is the one thing which distinguishes the successful from the
unsuccessful operator. The foregoing remarks show how that confidence
can be commanded, in spite of objective unbelief.

Much has been said by mesmerists about the exertion of "will power;"
but no one has ever explained just how that power is to be exerted, or
in what it consists. Most people seem to imagine that it is exercised
by compressing the lips, corrugating the brows, and assuming a fierce,
determined, not to say piratical, aspect. It is perhaps needless to
remark that the attitude of mind indicated by such an aspect is the
farthest possible from that which is required for the successful
exercise of so-called will power. It requires no mental or nervous
strain to exert that power. On the contrary, a calm serenity of mind
is indispensable. When that is acquired, the only other requisites are
confidence and an earnest desire to bring about the results sought.
That these three requisites can easily be acquired by any one of common
intelligence has already been shown.

From what has been said it seems evident that the force developed by
mesmeric manipulations has its origin in mental action. That that is
the motive power is certain. Whether this mental action creates or
develops a fluid akin to magnetism, is a question which may never be
solved. Nor is it deemed important that it should be; and it may be
as well to class it at once among the many things unknowable, as to
waste valuable time in a vain effort to wrest the secret from Nature.
Electricity is known as a great force in physical nature; and it is
harnessed and made to perform many services to mankind. Like all the
great forces of nature, it is invisible, except through its effects,
and it defies analysis. It will never be known to man except as one
of the great correlated forces. It is equally impossible to know just
what the force is which emanates from the mesmerist and controls his
subject. We know that it exists, and that it can be utilized, and that
is all. Whether it is a fluid or not is as impossible to know with
certainty as it is to know what electricity is made of, if we should
determine it to be a substance.

For some purposes, as has been remarked, the fluidic hypothesis is as
good as any, and for such purposes it may be provisionally accepted.
But the question is, Will that hypothesis apply to all the phenomena?
If that question is answered in the negative, it demonstrates its
incorrectness, and it becomes imperative that it should be abandoned.
When mesmeric passes are made over a patient, a fluid appears to
emanate from the hands of the operator. An effluence of some kind
certainly does come from that source, and one that is perceptible to
the physical senses of the patient. Is it not a fact, nevertheless,
that the passes are principally useful as a means of controlling the
minds both of the subject and the operator? There are many facts which
seem to point unmistakably in that direction. The one fact alone
that persons can be mesmerized at a distance, seems conclusive. No
passes are then made, and yet all the effects of personal contact are
produced. Thousands of persons have been healed at a distance, by
simple concentration of mind on the part of the operator, the patient
knowing absolutely nothing of the proposed experiment. This branch
of the subject will be more fully treated in a future chapter on
psycho-therapeutics. It is sufficient to remark now that the method
of healing here indicated is, when intelligently applied, the most
effective of all systems of mental therapeutics. And the significant
fact is that in the majority of cases the best results are produced
when the patient is kept in absolute ignorance of what is being done
for him. The reason for this will more fully appear as we proceed.

Again, the manner of mesmerizing animals is proof positive that the
successful exercise of mesmeric power is not dependent upon passes made
by the hand of the operator, for the usual method is to gaze steadily
into the eyes of the animal.

And this brings us to the discussion of some important distinctions
pertaining to the mesmerization of animals, which seem not to have
been observed by the investigators of that subject, but which show
more clearly than almost anything else the line of distinction between
hypnotism and mesmerism.

The intelligent reader will not have failed to observe that the effect
produced upon hens, frogs, crayfish, guinea-pigs, and birds is purely
hypnotic. The methods employed are Braid's. That is to say, they are
purely physical, sometimes produced by sudden peripheral stimulus,
as in flashing a Drummond light in the eyes of a cock (Richer). But
in general the external stimulus used with animals is tactile, as in
seizing them (Moll); or in causing them to gaze upon an object, as in
Kircher's method of hypnotizing a cock; or in gently stroking the back,
as in hypnotizing a frog or a crayfish. Each of these methods may be
classified as a hypnotic process, and the full equivalent of the method
discovered by Braid. The effect is also purely hypnotic; that is to
say, sleep is induced, varying in degree from a light slumber to a
profound lethargy.

On the other hand, such animals as horses, wild beasts, etc., may be
mesmerized, but not hypnotized. The processes are purely mesmeric, and
generally consist in gazing into the animal's eyes. The effect is
simply to render the animal docile, and obedient to the will of the
operator. No one was ever able to put an animal to sleep by gazing into
its eyes; but the most ferocious of the animal tribe may be tamed and
subjected to the dominion of man by that simple process. A celebrated
horse-tamer, who travelled through this country a few years ago, was
in the habit of astonishing and amusing his audiences by selecting
the wildest horse present, walking up to him, gazing into his eyes
(apparently) for a few moments, and walking away, when the horse would
follow him wherever he went, apparently as perfectly fascinated as any
hypnotic or mesmeric subject was ever fascinated by a professional
mesmerist. A close observation of the horse-tamer's methods revealed
the fact that he simply rolled his eyes upward and inward, precisely
as Braid compelled his subjects to do by holding a bright object
before their eyes. He did not gaze into the eyes of the horse at all,
but simply held himself in that attitude for a few moments, in close
proximity to the horse's head, when the object was accomplished, and
the horse became obedient to every command that it was capable of
comprehending. It is probable that the horse-tamer knew as little of
the secret of his power as did the horse. The tamers of wild beasts
proceed in the same manner, and probably with as little knowledge of
the principles underlying the method.

Now, the question arises, What is the effect thus produced on the
animal? It is certainly not hypnotized by being compelled to gaze
into the eyes of the operator, for sufficient time is not given to
"fatigue the muscles of the eye." Besides, the animal cannot be
compelled to gaze at anything. Is not the primary effect--hypnotic or
mesmeric--produced, not directly upon the animal, but upon the man
himself? It seems clear that this is the true solution of the problem.
Braid has taught us that by steadily gazing at any object a man can
hypnotize himself without knowing, or having it suggested to him, that
it is possible for him to do so. The man, then, is partially hypnotized
by gazing into the animal's eyes. The threshold of his consciousness
is thus displaced. His subjective powers are brought into play, and
in that condition his subjective mind is _en rapport_ with that of
the animal. The mind of the animal, being almost purely subjective,
is thus dominated by the imperious will of his master,--man. That
telepathy is the normal means of communication between animals cannot
be doubted by any one who has observed their habits with intelligence.
That man has the power, under certain conditions, to enter into
telepathic communication with animals, there are thousands of facts to
demonstrate. In a recent English work on the training of dogs,[19] this
subject is alluded to in the following language:--

    "As I before remarked, a man to be a first-rate dog-breaker must
    have lots of animal magnetism. Now, I do not doubt that in nearly
    every man who is born into the world this faculty exists to a
    greater or less extent. It is the force of will that develops it;
    and the more it is developed, the stronger it becomes. While, on
    the other hand, if the will is naturally weak, and no other pains
    are taken to strengthen it, it falls into abeyance, and in time, I
    think, is utterly lost,--and that sometimes beyond recall.

    "That there is such a power as this, no one who has ever had any
    experience with animals will attempt to deny. Take the horse, for
    instance. This is the easiest subject on which to exert the power,
    simply because the rider, and even the driver, is in closer contact
    with it than with any other animal.

    "As an example, take two somewhat timid, highly bred young horses,
    and put them side by side at the tail of a flying pack of hounds.
    Both their riders are equally good men as far as nerve, hands, and
    seat are concerned; but the one is a cut-and-thrust, whip-and-spur
    sort of fellow, while the other is a cool, quiet, deliberate
    customer, of sweet manners but iron will. As they cross the first
    half-a-dozen flying fences, side by side, it wants a keen eye to
    mark any difference in the execution. The difference, as a rule,
    will consist only in the different ways in which the horses land
    after their jumps,--the one will pitch a little heavily, a little
    'abroad,' a little as if he got there somehow, but did not quite
    know how; whilst the other will land lightly, exactly in the right
    spot, and precisely as if the two partners were one.

    "How comes this? One horse is being steered by physical power and
    science only; the other by a wonderful force, which joins together
    in one two minds and two bodies.

    "Now, see the test. Yonder waves a line of willows, and both riders
    know that the biggest and nastiest water jump in the county is
    ahead of them. Both equally mean to get over; but if they do, it
    will be in two different fashions: the one will compel his horse
    to jump it by sheer physical force; the other will jump it, if
    it is jumpable at all, as the 'senior partner' of the animal he
    bestrides. Down they go, sixty yards apart, and each, say, has
    picked a place which it is only just possible for a horse to
    cover; neither horse can turn his head; for, at the last stride,
    the velvet hands have become grips of iron. Splash goes Number 1;
    he went as far as he could: but that last two feet wanted just an
    impetus which was absent. How about Number 2? The rider has fixed
    his eye, and his mind with it, on yonder grassy spot on the other
    side of the water, and, sure enough, the fore-feet are simply
    'lifted' into it by something inward, not outward; but only the
    fore-feet. Still, the calculation of the strung-up mind has entered
    into that, the stirrups have been cast loose in the 'fly,' and the
    moment the hoofs touch the bank, the rider is over his horse's
    head, with reins in hand; a second more, the horse is beside him;
    yet another, and they are away forward, without losing more than a
    minute.

    "Assheton Smith expressed in _some_ manner--but only in _some_
    manner--what I mean in his well-known dictum, 'Throw your heart
    over a fence, and your horse is sure to follow.'

    "I could give hundreds of instances and anecdotes of this magnetic
    power of the rider over the horse, but one will suffice to prove my
    point.

    "I was out for a ride one day with an argumentative friend along
    the road, and was on a very celebrated old hunter that had been
    my friend and partner for many a season. We were talking on this
    subject, and my friend scoffed at the very idea of such a thing as
    a sort of visionary nonsense. A hundred yards ahead there was an
    intersecting cross-road, at right angles to that on which we were
    riding. I pulled up my horse.

    "'Now,' I said, 'look here; I will prove my theory to you. Choose
    and tell me which of these roads my horse shall take. You shall
    ride three lengths behind me; I will throw the reins on his neck,
    and I will bet you a sovereign he goes the way I will him; and
    you shall be the judge whether it is possible for me to have
    influenced him by any word, touch, or sign,--only, you must keep at
    a walk, and not utter a word or a sound.'

    "He made the bet, and fixed on the right hand cross-road as being
    the one he knew very well the horse had never been before, whilst
    the two others were both roads to 'meets.'

    "I simply fixed my eyes and my will on the road, and when the horse
    arrived at the spot, he turned down with the same alacrity as if
    his stable had been in full view.

    "I need not say that I have many times tried the same experiment,
    and that with many variations and many different horses, and
    hardly ever failed,--indeed, on American prairies I have found the
    habit once or twice a dangerous nuisance, inasmuch as the then
    involuntary exercise of the power has, when I have been myself
    lost, influenced the horse to go the wrong way, because I was
    thinking it was the right one, whereas, if he had been let alone,
    he would not have made a mistake.

    "Now, this magnetic power can be used with dogs, only in an
    inferior degree to horses."

The author then goes on to relate numerous instances, some of them
truly marvellous, in which he demonstrated his power over dogs. He was
evidently intelligently conscious of his power, but did not know the
conditions necessary to enable him to exercise it with uniform potency.

The most striking manifestations of the force under consideration are
by professional tamers of wild beasts. The reason of this lies in the
simple fact that they uniformly employ the means necessary to its
development,--namely, fixing their eyes upon those of the beast. This
is the traditional method. Its potency has been recognized for ages,
although the philosophical principles underlying it have never been
understood.

The conditions necessary for the exercise of this power are: first, the
subjective, or partially subjective, condition of the operator; and
secondly, his perfect faith and confidence in his power. The first is
easily attained by the simple process developed by Braid. The second
comes from successful practice, but may be commanded by the power of
auto-suggestion, as I have already shown.

History is full of instances going to show that man, in the subjective
condition, is always safe from harm by wild animals. The subjective
powers of primitive man were undoubtedly far superior to any now
possessed by any one save, perhaps, the East Indian adepts. Before the
development of objective means of communication in the form of speech,
his ideas were conveyed to his fellows by telepathy. And just in
proportion to the development of objective means of communication did
he cease to employ, and finally lose, his primitive methods and powers.
God gave him dominion over the beasts of the field and the fowls of the
air. In his primitive condition he was destitute of effective weapons
of offence or defence, such as have been evolved during the long ages
of a later civilization. He was surrounded by a monstrous fauna,
capable of annihilating the present race of civilized mankind, could it
be suddenly resurrected and turned loose in its old numbers and haunts.
In what consisted the power of primitive man to assert and maintain
his God-given dominion over the monsters of his day and generation? It
must have been the same power which is now exceptionally exercised by
the artificial displacement of the threshold of consciousness, thus
developing in a small degree his long dormant subjective powers. His
dominion was then a true one, all-potent, and far more perfect and
effective than it is to-day, with all the appliances of civilization at
his command.

Facts of record are not wanting to sustain the proposition that man
in a subjective, or partially subjective, condition is safe from the
attacks of wild beasts. One of the first recorded instances, and the
one most familiar, is the story of Daniel. Daniel was a prophet,--a
seer. At this day he would be known in some circles as a spiritual
medium; in others, as a mind-reader, a clairvoyant, etc.,---according
to the conception of each individual as to the origin of his powers. In
other words, he was a man possessed of great subjective powers. He was
naturally and habitually in that state in which, in modern parlance,
the threshold of his consciousness was displaced, and the powers of his
soul were developed. In this state he was thrown into the lions' den,
with the result recorded. The sceptic as to the divine authenticity of
the Scriptures can readily accept this story as literally true when he
recalls the experiments made in Paris a few years ago. In that city a
young lady was hypnotized and placed in a den of lions. The object of
the experiment is not now recalled; but the result was just the same as
that recorded of the ancient prophet. She had no fear of the lions, and
the lions paid not the slightest attention to her.

The adepts of India, and even the inferior priests of the Buddhistic
faith, often display their power by entering the jungles, so infested
by man-eating tigers that an ordinary man would not live an hour, and
remain there all night, with no weapons of defence save the God-given
powers of the soul.

The power of idiots, and persons afflicted with certain forms of
insanity, to tame and subdue animals has often been remarked. In such
persons the objective mind is either wholly or partially in abeyance,
and the subjective mind is proportionally active. Their immunity from
harm by animals, however ferocious, is proverbial.

Volumes might be filled with facts showing the power of the subjective
mind of man over animals; but enough has been said to demonstrate
the fact that the power exists, and that under certain well-defined
conditions it can be exercised by any person of ordinary intelligence.

It is believed that enough has been said to show the source of the
power developed by mesmeric processes, as distinguished from the
results of hypnotism. It has been seen that the primary source of power
is in the mesmerist, that it is developed by processes which place him
in the same condition as, or in a condition cognate to, that in which
the subject himself is placed, and that when these conditions exist,
and just in proportion to the perfection of these conditions, can the
phenomena of telepathy, clairvoyance, and all the higher phenomena of
subjective activity be produced.

The difference between the effects of mesmerism on man and animals is
one of degree only; and the difference of degree is determined only
by their difference in intelligence. The laws are the same. When a
man is mesmerized, his subjective mind may be stimulated to activity,
whether his objective mind is completely in abeyance or not. If it is
completely in abeyance, the subjective phenomena will be all the more
pronounced and complete. But when an animal is put to sleep, little
or no subjective phenomena can be exhibited, for the simple reason
that he has not the power of speech, and his intelligence is otherwise
limited. The same law also governs the production of hypnotic phenomena
in men and animals alike. An animal can be put to sleep by hypnotic
processes; but he cannot be made to exhibit subjective phenomena during
that sleep, owing solely to the limitations of his intelligence. He is
not capable of receiving and understanding a suggestion. Besides, in
hypnotism, as has been shown, there is no telepathic rapport existing
between the operator and the subject. Consequently the phenomena which
may be exhibited through or by means of mesmeric processes, which grow
out of telepathic rapport, cannot be exhibited in hypnotism.

It may be thought that the laws governing the production of mesmeric
phenomena show that the law of suggestion is, after all, limited in
its scope and application. This is not true, except in the sense that
suggestion, as has already been shown, is not a necessary element
in the induction of the hypnotic state. The proposition that the
subjective mind is constantly amenable to control by suggestion
is not affected in the slightest degree by mesmeric phenomena. On
the contrary, they distinctly prove the universality of that law.
Suggestion is not necessarily limited to oral communication. Nor is
it necessarily a communication which can be taken cognizance of by
means of any of the objective senses. Telepathic communication is
just as much a suggestion to the subjective mind as is oral speech.
Indeed, telepathic suggestion is often far more effective than
objective language, as will be clearly shown in a future chapter on
the subject of psycho-therapeutics. Hence the power to mesmerize at
a distance. In such cases, however, it seems to be necessary that the
operator and subject should be by some means brought into telepathic
rapport. When that has been done, especially when the rapport has been
established by the subject having been previously mesmerized by the
same operator, it is perfectly easy to mesmerize at a distance. In such
a case no previous arrangement is necessary. The suggestion is then
purely mental. But it is suggestion, nevertheless, and demonstrates
the universality of the law. Numerous instances of the exercise of
this power by purely telepathic methods are cited in the able work on
Hypnotism by Professor Bj�rnstrom, to which the reader is referred for
particulars.

One further remark should be made regarding the power to mesmerize at
a distance, and that is, that it depends solely upon the faith and
confidence of the operator. Distance, or space, as it is cognized by
our objective senses, does not appear to exist for the subjective mind.
There is, therefore, nothing in distance, _per se_, to prevent the
full effects of mesmeric power from being felt at the antipodes just
as plainly and effectively as it is in the same room. We are, however,
so in the habit of regarding distance as an adverse element that it is
difficult to overcome the adverse suggestion that it conveys. When this
principle is once understood and fully realized, there will be nothing
to prevent an operator from exercising his power at any distance he may
desire.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 19: Scientific Education of Dogs. By H.H. London. p. 85.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER X.

HYPNOTISM AND CRIME.

    Platform Experiments misleading.--Their Utter Inutility as a
    Test.--So-called "Tests" described and explained.--Sexual Outrages
    impossible.--Auto-suggestion protects the Virtuous.--A Willing
    Subject necessary.--Demonstrative Experiments.--Modern Authorities
    cited against themselves.--Professor Gregory's Views.--The Elevated
    Moral Tone of Subjects when mesmerized.--Successful Suggestion
    of Suicide impossible.--The Three Normal Functions of the
    Subjective Mind.--Self-Preservation.--Propagation.--Preservation
    of Offspring.--Instinctive Auto-suggestion.--Indifference
    on Near Approach of Death.--A Universal Law.--Illustrative
    Incidents.--Suggestive Criminal Abortion impossible.--Premonitions
    explained.--The D�mon of Socrates.--Clairaudience.--The Instinct of
    Death.--Hypnotism in Jurisprudence.--Testimony Valueless.--Vital
    Secrets impossible to obtain.--Doctors must not monopolize the
    Forces of Nature.--The Folly of Adverse Legislation.


Before leaving the subject of hypnotism, I deem it proper to say a
few words on one of its branches which is just now attracting the
attention alike of students of the science and the public at large.
The idea is being very generally promulgated among the people that
the ability of one man to mesmerize or hypnotize another implies the
possession of a very dangerous power, and one which, in the hands of
an unscrupulous man, may be used for criminal purposes. It is perhaps
not strange that such an idea should prevail among those who have not
studied the science except by observation of platform experiments,
which are designed rather to amuse than to instruct. There is something
so mysterious in the whole subject, viewed from the standpoint of an
audience assembled to witness experiments of this character, that it
would be strange indeed if the average man were not impressed with
an indefinable dread of the power of the hypnotist. He sees him, by
means of certain mysterious manipulations, throw his subject into
a profound sleep, and awaken him by a snap of the fingers. He sees
the subject impressed with all manner of incongruous ideas,--made to
believe that he is Diogenes, or a dog, at the will of the operator.
He is made to ride an imaginary horse-race, astride a deal table,
or to go in swimming on the bare floor. He is made to see angels or
devils; to wander in the Elysian fields of paradise, or to scorch
in the sulphurous fires of hell; to feel pain or pleasure, joy or
sorrow,--all at the caprice of the man in whose power he has placed
himself. All this, and much more, can be seen at public exhibitions
of hypnotism, and under conditions that leave no doubt in the mind
of the observer, of the genuineness of the phenomena. He sees his
friends, for whose integrity he can vouch, go upon the platform and
become subject to the same mysterious power. Still doubting, he may go
upon the stage himself, only to find that he is amenable to the same
subtle influence, controllable by some power that is to him agreeable,
yet mysterious, indefinable, incomprehensible. At first he perfectly
comprehends all his objective surroundings, remembers afterwards
all that took place, and very likely fancies that he obeyed the
suggestions of the hypnotist merely to please him and to avoid doing
anything to mar the harmony of the occasion. Later on he learns that
his supposed complacency was really an irresistible impulse to obey
the will of the hypnotist. As the experiments proceed he experiences
the sensation of double consciousness. He is told that in his hand he
holds a delicious fruit,--a strawberry, perhaps. He is still possessed
of sufficient objective consciousness to know that there is really no
strawberry in his hand, and yet he sees it plainly, feels it, smells
it, tastes it, and experiences all the satisfaction incident to having
actually eaten the fruit. He is able to converse rationally on the
subject, and to express his amazement at the vividness and apparent
reality of the subjective sensation. After a few repetitions of the
experiments he loses all consciousness of his objective environment,
yields unquestioning obedience to the suggestions of the hypnotist,
and retains no recollection, after he is awakened, of what occurred
when he was in the somnambulic condition. His friends inform him of
the many wonderful things which occurred, of his ready obedience to
all suggestions,--how he made a speech far transcending his natural
abilities, under the influence of a suggestion that he was Daniel
Webster; how he flapped his wings and crowed when told that he was a
cock; and so on through the _r�pertoire_ of platform experiments. He
is now strongly impressed with the idea that he was controlled by a
power that he could under no circumstances resist. But, wishing to
pursue his investigations further, he resolves to test the question
whether this power can be employed for criminal purposes. A few friends
are called together, a hypnotist is employed, and a few well-trained
subjects are invited to give a private exhibition for the benefit of
"science." In order to give the proposed psychological experiment an
undoubted scientific value, a few doctors of physic are invited to
be present,--not because they know anything about psychology or of
hypnotism, but because it is well known that they have heard something
about the latter science, particularly that it has been found to be a
great therapeutic agent, and they are just now deeply interested in
proving that hypnotism, in the hands of any one outside of the medical
profession, must necessarily be employed for the perpetration of crime.

We will now suppose that the guests are assembled and the experiments
are about to be made. The question is freely discussed in the presence
of the subjects, each one of whom is duly impressed with the idea that
he is about to become the instrument of science for the elucidation
and definite settlement of the great problem of the age. The subject
is now duly hypnotized, and the inevitable paper dagger is placed in
his hands. An imaginary man in a distant part of the room is pointed
out, and the subject is informed that the said man is his mortal
enemy; and he is duly advised that the best thing he can do under the
circumstances is to proceed to slaughter the enemy aforesaid. This
he has no hesitation in doing, and he proceeds to do it with great
dramatic effect. He sneaks up to his victim in the style of the last
heavy villain he has seen on the stage, and plunges the imaginary
dagger into the hypothetical man, amidst the applause of the assembled
village wisdom.

The next subject is duly hypnotized, and informed that he is a noted
pickpocket. The guests are pointed out as a good crowd to work for
"wipers," or whatever is thieves' slang for pocket-handkerchiefs. The
subject accepts the suggestion at once, and, with much show of cunning,
proceeds to relieve the guests of whatever is within his reach.

The next subject is advised that he is an accomplished burglar, and
that a neighboring house is overflowing with plunder. He enters into
the spirit of the suggestion with great alacrity, and a committee is
duly appointed to accompany him to the scene of pillage. The neighbor
is, meantime, apprised of the proposed burglary, and every facility
is afforded, in the interest of "science." (The reader will remember
that actual occurrences are being described.) The burglary is completed
with great skill and promptitude, and a miscellaneous collection of
valuables is brought away and equitably divided with the hypnotist.

The above are fair samples of the "scientific" experiments which
are just now being largely indulged in, and which are believed to
demonstrate the possibility of employing hypnotism as an instrument of
crime. "If the average subject," it is argued, "in a state of profound
hypnotic sleep, is so amenable to the power of suggestion as to plunge
a paper dagger into an imaginary enemy at the bidding of a hypnotist,
it follows that a criminal hypnotist possesses unlimited power to
cause any one of his subjects to plunge a real dagger into any victim
whom the hypnotist may select for slaughter." If the conclusions
were correct, the power would be indeed formidable, and, in the hands
of unscrupulous men, dangerous. Much has been written on the subject
of the possibility of sexual outrage by means of hypnotism, and a
few cases are reported in the books. None of them, however, bear the
unmistakable stamp of genuineness, and most of them bear internal
evidence of fraud. The best authorities on the subject are now free to
confess to very grave doubts, at least, of the possibility of crime
being instigated by this means. Thus, Moll,[20] one of the latest and
certainly one of the ablest writers on the subject, has the following:--

    "There are important differences of opinion about the offences
    which hypnotic subjects may be caused to commit. Li�geois, who
    has discussed the legal side of the question of hypnotism in a
    scientific manner, thinks this danger very great, while Gilles de
    la Tourette, Pierre Janet, Benedikt, and others, deny it altogether.

    "There is no doubt that subjects may be induced to commit all
    sorts of imaginary crimes in one's study. I have made hardly any
    such suggestions, and have small experience on the point. In any
    case, a repetition of them is superfluous. If the conditions of
    the experiment are not changed, it is useless to repeat it merely
    to confirm what we already know. And these criminal suggestions
    are not altogether pleasant. I certainly do not believe that they
    injure the moral state of the subject, for the suggestion may be
    negatived and forgotten. But these laboratory experiments prove
    nothing, because some trace of consciousness always remains to tell
    the subject he is playing a comedy (Franck Delboeuf), consequently
    he will offer a slighter resistance. He will more readily try to
    commit a murder with a piece of paper than with a real dagger,
    because, as we have seen, he almost always dimly realizes his real
    situation. These experiments, carried out by Li�geois, Foreaux, and
    others in their studies do not, therefore, prove danger."

Such experiments prove nothing, simply because they are experiments.
The subject knows that he is among his friends. He has confidence
in the integrity of the hypnotist. He is most likely aware of the
nature of the proposed experiments. He enters into the spirit of the
occasion, resolved to accept every suggestion offered, and to carry
out his part of the programme in the best style, knowing that no
possible harm can befall him. Moreover, he knows that if he performs
his part to the satisfaction of his auditors, he will receive their
applause; and applause to the subjective mind is as sweet incense. For,
be it known, the average hypnotic subject is inordinately vain of his
accomplishments.

All those considerations are, however, merely negative evidence
against the supposition that the innocent hypnotic subject can be made
the instrument of crime, or the victim of criminal assault against
his will. These experiments prove nothing, that is all. Nor do they
disprove anything. We must, therefore, look elsewhere for positive
evidence to demonstrate the impossibility of making the innocent
subject the instrument or the victim of crime. This evidence is not
difficult to find.

It will be unnecessary to travel outside the domain of admitted,
recorded, and demonstrated facts in order to prove the utter
impossibility of victimizing virtue and innocence by means of
hypnotism. Indeed, it is difficult to understand how any one who
recognizes the law of suggestion, and its universal application to
psychological phenomena, can believe for one moment that hypnotism can
be made the instrument of crime. Yet we find disciples of the Nancy
school who seem to imagine that to hold that it cannot be so employed
is equivalent to an admission that the law of suggestion is not of
universal application. The fact is that just the contrary is true. It
is one of the strongest demonstrations of the universality of the law
that hypnotism cannot be so employed.

The first proposition in the line of the argument is that when two
contrary suggestions are offered to the hypnotic subject, the strongest
must prevail. It needs no argument to sustain this proposition; it is
self-evident.

The next proposition, almost equally plain, is that auto-suggestion as
a factor in hypnotism is equal in potency, other things being equal,
with the suggestion of another.

Auto-suggestion is now recognized as a factor in hypnotism by all
followers of the Nancy school. Professor Bernheim mentions it as an
obstacle in the way of the cure of some of his patients. One case that
he mentions was that of a young girl suffering from a tibio-tarsal
sprain. "I tried to hypnotize her," says Bernheim; "she gave herself
up to it with bad grace, saying that it would do no good. I succeeded,
however, in putting her into a deep enough sleep two or three times.
But the painful contracture persisted: she seemed to take a malicious
delight in proving to the other patients in the service that it did
no good, _that she always felt worse_.... The inrooted idea, _the
unconscious auto-suggestion_, is such that nothing can pull it up
again. When the treatment was begun, she seemed to be convinced that
hypnotism could not cure her. Is it this idea, so deeply rooted in her
brain, which neutralizes our efforts and her own wish to be cured?"[21]

Moll, more distinctly than Bernheim, recognizes the power of
auto-suggestion as a potent factor which must always be taken into
account in conducting experiments; although he, like Bernheim,
strangely forgets to take it into account when he discusses hypnotism
in its relations to crime. The following passage, for instance, should
have been incorporated in his chapter on the Legal Aspects of Hypnotism:

    "Expressions of the will which spring from the individual character
    of the patient are of the deepest psychological interest. The
    more an action is repulsive to his disposition, the stronger is
    his resistance (Forel). Habit and education play a large part
    here; it is generally very difficult successfully to suggest
    anything that is opposed to the confirmed habits of the subject.
    For instance, suggestions are made with success to a devout
    Catholic; but directly the suggestion conflicts with his creed,
    it will not be accepted. The surroundings play a part also. A
    subject will frequently decline a suggestion that will make him
    appear ridiculous. A woman whom I easily put into cataleptic
    postures, and who made suggested movements, could not be induced
    to put out her tongue at the spectators. In another such case I
    succeeded, but only after repeated suggestions. The manner of
    making the suggestion has an influence. In some cases it must
    be often repeated before it succeeds; other subjects interpret
    the repetition of the suggestion as a sign of the experimenter's
    incapacity, and of their own ability to resist. Thus it is
    necessary to take character into account. It is often easier to
    induce some action by suggesting each separate movement than by
    suggesting the whole action at once (Bleuler). For example, if
    the subject is to fetch a book from the table, the movements may
    be suggested in turn: first the lifting, then the steps, etc.
    (Bleuler.)

    "It is interesting to observe the way in which resistance is
    expressed, both in hypnotic and post-hypnotic suggestion. I myself
    have observed the interesting phenomenon that subjects have asked
    to be awakened when a suggestion displeased them.

    "Exactly the same resistance is sometimes offered to a
    post-hypnotic suggestion. It is possible in such a case that the
    subject, even in the hypnotic state, will decline to accept the
    suggestion. Many carry out only the suggestions to which they have
    assented (Pierre Janet).

    "Pitres relates an interesting case of a girl who would not allow
    him to awake her, because he had suggested that on waking she would
    not be able to speak. She positively declared that she would not
    wake until he gave up his suggestion. But even when the suggestion
    is accepted as such, a decided resistance is often expressed during
    its post-hypnotic execution. This shows itself as often in slow
    and lingering movements as in a decided refusal to perform the act
    at all. The more repugnant the acting, the more likely is it to be
    omitted."[22]

Thousands of experiments are daily being made which demonstrate the
impossibility of controlling the hypnotic subject so far as to cause
him to do that which he believes or knows to be wrong. A common
platform experiment is that of causing subjects to get drunk on water,
under the suggestion that it is whiskey. It frequently happens that
one or more of the subjects are conscientiously opposed to the use
of strong drink as a beverage. Such persons invariably decline, in
the most emphatic manner, to indulge in the proposed debauch. Like
all such experiments on the stage before a mixed audience, they are
passed by as simply amusing, and no lesson is learned from them. The
intelligent student, however, cannot fail to see the far-reaching
significance of the refusal of a subject to violate his temperance
principles. Again, every platform experimenter knows that whilst he can
cause a crowd of his subjects to go in swimming in imaginary waters, he
can never induce them to divest themselves of their clothing beyond the
limits of decency. Some cannot even be made to take off their coats in
presence of the audience. Others will decline to accept any suggestion,
the pursuance of which would cause them to appear ridiculous.

Again, it is well known to hypnotists that an attempt to contradict or
argue with a subject in the hypnotic state invariably distresses him,
and persistency in such a course awakens him, often with a nervous
shock. A conflict of suggestions invariably causes confusion in the
subjective mind, and generally results in restoring the subject to
normal consciousness.

Now, what is an auto-suggestion? In its broad signification it embraces
not only the assertions of the objective mind of an individual,
addressed to his own subjective mind, but also the habits of thought
of the individual, and the settled principles and convictions of his
whole life; and the more deeply rooted are those habits of thought,
principles, and convictions, the stronger and more potent are the
auto-suggestions, and the more difficult they are to overcome by
the contrary suggestions of another. It is, in fact, impossible for
a hypnotist to impress a suggestion so strongly upon a subject as
to cause him actually to perform an act in violation of the settled
principles of his life. If this were not true, suggestion would mean
nothing; it would have no place in psychological science, because it
would not be a law of universal application. The strongest suggestion
must prevail.

It will thus be seen that the question as to whether hypnotism can be
successfully employed for criminal purposes, must be determined in
each individual case by the character of the persons engaged in the
experiment. If the subject is a criminal character, he might follow
the suggestions of a criminal hypnotist, and actually perpetrate a
crime. In such a case, a resort to hypnotism for criminal purposes
would be unnecessary, and no possible advantage could be gained by its
employment.

It is obvious that the same rule applies to sexual crimes; and it may
be set down as a maxim in hypnotic science that no virtuous woman
ever was, or ever can be, successfully assaulted while in a hypnotic
condition. This is a corollary of the demonstrated propositions which
precede it; and it admits of no exception or qualification.

A virtuous woman is, indeed, in less danger of successful assault while
in that state than she is in her normal condition, for the simple
reason that hypnotic subjects are always endowed with a physical
strength far superior to that possessed in the normal condition.
Besides, it is the observation of every successful hypnotist that
the moral tone of the hypnotic subject, while in that condition, is
always elevated. On this subject we will let the late Professor Gregory
speak:--

    "When the sleeper has become fully asleep, so as to answer
    questions readily without waking, there is almost always observed
    a remarkable change in the countenance, the manner, and the voice.
    On falling asleep at first, he looks, perhaps, drowsy and heavy,
    like a person dozing in church, or at table when overcome by
    fatigue, or stupefied by excess in wine, or by the foul air of a
    crowded apartment; but when spoken to, he usually brightens up,
    and although the eyes be closed, yet the expression becomes highly
    intelligent, quite as much so as if he saw. His whole manner seems
    to undergo a refinement which, in the higher stages, reaches a
    most striking point, insomuch that we see, as it were, before us
    a person of a much more elevated character than the same sleeper
    seems to be when awake. It would seem as if the lower, or animal,
    propensities were laid to rest, while the intellect and higher
    sentiments shone forth with a lustre that is undiminished by aught
    that is mean or common. This is particularly seen in women of
    natural refinement and high sentiments; but it is also seen in
    men of the same stamp, and more or less in all. In the highest
    stages of the mesmeric sleep the countenance often acquires the
    most lovely expression, surpassing all that the great artists have
    given to the Virgin Mary or to angels, and which may fitly be
    called heavenly, for it involuntarily suggests to our minds the
    moral and intellectual beauty which alone seems consistent with our
    views of heaven. As to the voice, I have never seen one person in
    the true mesmeric sleep who did not speak in a tone quite distinct
    from the ordinary voice of the sleeper. It is invariably, so far
    as I have observed, softer and more gentle, well corresponding
    to the elevated and mild expression of the face. It has often a
    plaintive and touching character, especially when the sleeper
    speaks of departed friends or relations. In the highest stages it
    has a character quite new, and in perfect accordance with the pure
    and lovely smile of the countenance, which beams on the observer,
    in spite of the closed eyes, like a ray of heaven's own light and
    beauty. I speak here of that which I have often seen, and I would
    say that, as a general rule, the sleeper, when in his ordinary
    state and when in the deep mesmeric sleep, appears not like the
    same, but like two different individuals. And it is not wonderful
    that it should be so. For the sleeper, in the mesmeric state, has
    a consciousness quite separate and distinct from his ordinary
    consciousness; he is, in fact, if not a different individual, yet
    the same individual in a different and distinct phase of his being,
    and that phase a higher one."[23]

Professor Gregory's experience and observation have been those of every
hypnotist and mesmerist whose works have been examined. There is,
indeed, an ineffable and indescribable something which overspreads the
countenance of the virtuous woman while she is in the hypnotic state,
which disarms passion, and affects the beholder with a feeling that he
has something seen of heaven. He knows that the physical senses are
asleep, and he feels that the soul is shining forth in all its majesty
and purity, untainted by any thought that is gross, any emotion that is
impure.

One of the assertions most confidently made by those who hold that
crime is the necessary result of hypnotic experiment, outside of the
medical profession, is that a hypnotic subject can be made to commit
suicide by suggesting to him the propriety of so doing. There is, if
possible, even less foundation for this supposition than there is for
any other in the whole catalogue. The reason of this will be obvious
when we take into consideration some of the distinctive attributes of
the subjective mind. It will not be disputed that the attribute of
the subjective mind, which is known as intuition when applied to man,
corresponds exactly with what we call instinct when applied to animals.
Now, there are three primary functions, or, let us say, instincts,
of the subjective mind, which are common to men and the whole animal
creation. The first pertains to the preservation of the life of
the individual, and is called, in common parlance, the instinct of
self-preservation. This is admittedly the strongest instinct of animal
nature. The second, in the order of strength and of universality, is
the instinct of reproduction. The third pertains to the preservation
of human life generally, and of one's offspring particularly. Each
pertains to the perpetuity of the race. The first and second are
universal, and the third is practically so; the only exceptions being
in rare cases of individual idiosyncrasy, or in a very low order of
animal life. The potency of these instincts is too well known to
require comment.

There is one peculiarity, however, pertaining to subjective activity
when the life of the individual is in danger, or that of offspring
is imperilled, that is not so generally appreciated. In such cases
the subjective mind takes prompt possession of the individual, and
every act is subjective as long as active exertion is required to
preserve the imperilled life. That this is true is shown, first, by
the preternatural strength with which the person is endowed under such
circumstances; second, by the total absence of fear; and third, by the
wonderful presence of mind displayed in the instantaneous adaptation
of every means to its proper end, and in doing exactly the right thing
at the right time. Comment is often made on the wonderful "presence of
mind" displayed by persons in great peril when instantaneous action is
required, and there is no time for reflection or reasoning out a plan
of action or defence. This presence of mind, so called, is nothing
more or less than subjective activity, or, in other words, instinctive
action, the objective faculties being in almost complete abeyance for
the time being. That this is true is further shown by the fact that a
person in imminent and deadly peril will often emerge from the very
jaws of death with nerves unshaken, the coolest and most collected
person present. This is often mistaken for courage. It has, however,
nothing whatever to do with the question of personal bravery. The
veriest coward will, under circumstances of unavoidable danger, act
with the same coolness, and evince the same presence of mind, as the
bravest man. The most timid woman will fight like a demon, and display
preternatural strength and courage, for the preservation of her own
life or that of her offspring. The action is instinctive. In other
words, it is the normal function of the subjective entity.

The condition of the person at such times is akin to, if not identical
with, the state of hypnotism or partial hypnotism. It may be that
the objective and subjective faculties act at such times in perfect
synchronism; but certain it is that every evidence of subjective
activity is present, even the phenomenon of anesthesia. This is shown
by the fact that at such times the body feels no pain, no matter how
severe the injury. The universal testimony of soldiers who have been
in battle is to the effect that the time when fear is experienced is
just before the action commences. When the first gun is fired, all fear
vanishes, and the soldier often performs feats of the most desperate
valor and evinces the most reckless courage. If wounded, he feels
nothing until the battle is over and all excitement is gone. It is a
merciful provision of nature that the nearer we approach death, the
less we fear it. This law is universal. It is only in the vigor of
youth and manhood that death is looked upon with horror. The aged view
its near approach with calm serenity. The convicted murderer, as long
as there is hope of pardon, reprieve, escape, or commutation of the
death-penalty, evinces the utmost dread of the scaffold; but when the
death-penalty is pronounced, and all hope has fled, he often evinces
the utmost indifference, welcomes the day of his execution, and marches
to the scaffold without a tremor. The newspapers speak with wonder and
admiration of his courage, and the universal verdict is that he was
a brave man, and "died game." The truth is that the universal law of
which we speak, that merciful provision of nature which nerves alike
the brave man and the coward, steps in to his defence, his objective
senses are benumbed, and he submits to the inevitable change without
fear and without pain.

The testimony of Dr. Livingstone is to the same effect. He was once
seized by a lion when hunting in the jungles of Africa, and carried
some distance, his body between the lion's jaws. When death seemed
inevitable, he testifies that all fear left him, and a delicious
languor stole over his senses. The grasp of the lion's jaws caused no
pain, and he felt fully resigned to his fate. A fortunate shot from the
gun of one of his companions released him, and he was rescued.

This, however, is a digression. The main point which it is desired to
enforce is, first, that the strongest instinct in mankind is that of
self-preservation; and second, that this instinct, this strong desire
to preserve the life of the body, constitutes a subjective, or an
instinctive, auto-suggestion of such supreme potency that no suggestion
from another, nor any objective auto-suggestion, could possibly
overcome it. The inevitable conclusion is that suicide is certainly not
a crime which can be successfully instigated by means of hypnotism.

Criminal abortion is another of the crimes which, the people are
told, can be performed by means of hypnotic suggestion. The inherent
absurdity of this statement is almost as great as that suicide can
be successfully instigated by such means. It is here that another
strong instinct prevails against a suggestion of that character,
namely, the desire inherent in the soul of the mother to preserve her
offspring. It is possibly true that conception could be prevented by
hypnotic suggestion, and it may be true that barrenness is sometimes
caused by unconscious auto-suggestion; but a very different state
of affairs exists after the foetus is once formed. The instinctive
desire to preserve the life that exists, constitutes an instinctive
auto-suggestion which no suggestion from another, nor even the
objective auto-suggestion of the mother, could prevail against.

It may be safely set down, therefore, as a fundamental truth of
hypnotic science that the auto-suggestion most difficult to overcome
is that which originates in the normal action of the subjective
mind,--otherwise, instinctive auto-suggestion.

The same line of reasoning applies, though with somewhat diminished
force, to the commission of other crimes. We will suppose the most
favorable condition possible for procuring the commission of a capital
crime; namely, a criminal hypnotist in control of a criminal subject.
The disposition of the subject might not stand in the way; there might
be no auto-suggestion against the commission of crime in the habits
and principles of the life of the subject; and yet the instinct of
self-preservation would have its weight and influence in suggesting to
him that the commission of a murder would imperil his own life. Such a
consideration would operate as potently in the hypnotic condition as it
would in the normal state. It would be an instinctive auto-suggestion,
just the same as in the case of suicide, although it would operate
indirectly in one case, and directly in the other. The deductive
reasoning of the subjective mind, as we have seen in preceding
chapters, is perfect; and in the case supposed, the subject would
instantaneously reason from the proposed crime to its consequences to
himself. The same law would operate in preventing the commission of
crimes of less magnitude, with a resistance decreased in proportion
to the nature of the offence. But it would, in all cases, be a factor
of great importance in the prevention of crime; for the subjective
mind is ever alert where the safety and well-being of the individual
are concerned. This law is universal, and has often been manifested
in the most striking manner. Premonitions of impending danger, so
often felt and recorded, are manifestations of the constant solicitude
of the subjective entity for the welfare of the individual. It is
comparatively rare that these subjective impressions are brought above
the threshold of consciousness; but this is largely due to the habits
of thought of mankind at the present day. Generally such impressions
are disregarded, and in this sceptical and materialistic age are often
relegated to the domain of superstition. When they are felt and acted
upon, they are generally attributed to a supernatural source. The d�mon
of Socrates is a strong case in point. He believed himself to have
been constantly attended by a familiar spirit, whose voice he could
hear, and whose admonitions were always wise. That he did hear voices
there can, in the light of modern science, be little doubt. It is
noteworthy, however, that the voice was generally one of warning, and
that its strongest manifestations were made when his personal safety
or his personal well-being was involved. The explanation, in pursuance
of the hypothesis under discussion in this book, is not difficult.
He was endowed with that rare faculty which, in one way or another,
belongs to all men of true genius, and which enabled him to draw from
the storehouse of subjective knowledge. In his case the threshold of
consciousness was so easily displaced that his subjective mind was able
at will to communicate with his objective mind in words audible to his
senses. This phenomenon is known to spiritists as clairaudience. As
before remarked, this voice was generally one of warning, and was the
direct manifestation of that strongest instinct of the human soul,--the
instinct of self-preservation.

To this the classical student will doubtless interpose the objection
that the d�mon failed to warn the philosopher in the hour of his
direst need; it failed to admonish him against that course of conduct
which led to inevitable death. Socrates was accustomed to construe
the silence of the d�mon as an approval of his conduct; and when the
decisive moment arrived when he could have saved himself had he chosen
to do so, the divine voice was silent. Only once did it interpose its
warning, and that was to prevent him from preparing a speech which
might have saved him from the hemlock.

The explanation of this failure may be found in the experience of all
mankind. This instinctive clinging to life weakens with advancing
years, and appears to cease altogether the moment a man's career of
usefulness in life has ended. This is the experience of every-day life.
Men grow rich, and in the full vigor of a green old age retire from
business, hoping to enjoy many years of rest. The result is, generally,
death in a very short time. An old man thrown out of employment,
with nothing to hope for in the future, lies down and dies. Another,
losing his aged companion, follows within a few days or weeks. Another
lives only to see his children married and settled, and when that is
accomplished, cheerfully lets go his hold on life. In fact, it seems to
be as much an instinct to die, when one's usefulness is ended, as to
cling to life as long as there is something to do to contribute to the
general welfare.

Socrates was an old man. He had lived a long and useful life, but his
career of usefulness was ended; for the authorities of the State had
decided that his teachings were impious, and corrupting to youth. Had
he lived, it would have been at the price of dishonor, his compensation
a miserable old age. Besides, his doctrine that death is not an evil,
together with his lofty sentiments regarding the duty of the citizen to
the commonwealth,--a duty which he maintained could be performed in his
case only by submitting to its decrees and carrying into execution its
judgments,--constituted a potential element of auto-suggestion which
must be considered in estimating the psychological features of his
case. He felt that the principles of his whole life would be violated
by any attempt to escape or evade the penalty which had been decreed
against him; and he spent his last hours in an effort to convince
his friends that the death of the body is not an evil, when life is
purchased at the price of dishonor. He felt that the philosophy which
it had been the business of his life to teach, could only be vindicated
by his death, at the time and in the manner decreed by the State. The
supreme moment had arrived; the instinct of death was upon him; and,
in philosophical communion with his followers, he calmly drank the
hemlock, and died the death of a philosopher.

The value of testimony in criminal cases, obtained by means of
hypnotism, has been very freely discussed by those who have given
their attention to the legal aspect of the question. Assuming that a
person has been hypnotized, and caused to commit a crime, the question
naturally arises, What means are at hand to convict the guilty party?
How is evidence to be obtained, and what is its value when obtained?
As it has been shown to be a practical impossibility to procure the
commission of crime by means of hypnotic suggestion, it will be
unnecessary and unprofitable to discuss the question at great length,
and it will be dismissed after the presentation of the vital point. It
is obvious that when it is demonstrated that evidence is unreliable,
and necessarily unworthy of credence, it is useless to discuss the ways
and means of obtaining such evidence for use in a court of justice. The
intricate maze of metaphysical disquisition in which this question has
been so ably obscured by writers on the subject, will not be entered.
It is sufficient to know that no testimony obtained from a subject in
a state of hypnotism, relating to any vital question which involves
the guilt or innocence of himself or his friends, is of any value
whatever. It is a popular belief, handed down through the ages, that
a somnambulic subject will always tell the truth, and that all the
secrets of a sleep-walker can be obtained from him for the asking. This
belief has also been held regarding the hypnotic subject; and it is
upon this assumption that the hypothetical value of his testimony in
criminal jurisprudence depends. It is true that, on ordinary questions,
the truth is always uppermost in the subjective mind. A hypnotic
subject will often say, during the hypnotic sleep, that which he would
not say in his waking moments. Nevertheless, he never betrays a vital
secret. The reason is obvious to those who have followed the line
of argument in the preceding pages of this chapter. The instinct of
self-preservation, always alert to avert any danger which threatens
the individual, steps in to his defence. Instinctive auto-suggestion
here plays its subtle _r�le_, and no suggestion from another can
prevail against it. If the defence involves falsehood, a falsehood will
be told, without the slightest hesitation; and it will be told with
preternatural acumen, and with such plausible circumstantiality of
detail as to deceive the very elect. Neither will there be any variance
or shadow of turning after repeated experiments, for the memory of the
subjective mind is perfect.

This rule holds good, not only with regard to secrets which involve
the personal safety of the individual, but in all matters pertaining
to his material interests, his reputation, or the interests of his
friends, whose secrets are confided to his care. That this is true is
presumptively proved by the fact that in all the years during which the
science of hypnotism has been practised, no one has ever been known to
betray the secrets of any society or order. The attempt has often been
made, but it has never succeeded. The truth of this assertion can be
demonstrated at any time by experiment.

Such an experiment has a greater evidential value in establishing the
rule than almost any other laboratory experiment. A subject might
plunge a paper dagger into an imaginary man, or he might draw a check,
sign a note, a contract, or a deed, in obedience to experimental
suggestions, when he would not commit a real crime, or sign away his
birthright, in obedience to criminal suggestion. But when a subject
is asked to betray the secrets of a society to which he belongs,
it is quite a different matter. In the one case a compliance with
the suggestion proves nothing, simply because it is a laboratory
experiment. In the other case his refusal to comply with the suggestion
proves everything, because his betrayal of such a secret in the
laboratory is just as vital as to betray it elsewhere.

It is obvious, therefore, that the testimony of a hypnotized subject in
a court of justice can possess no evidential value whatever. Not one of
the conditions would be present which give weight to human testimony.
The subject could not be punished for perjury if he swore falsely. In
matters of indifference to him he would be in constant danger of being
swayed by the artful or accidental suggestion of another. A false
premise suggested to him at the start would color and pervert his whole
testimony. A cross-examination would utterly confuse him, and almost
inevitably restore him to normal consciousness. On questions of vital
interest to himself, auto-suggestion would cause him to resort to
falsehood if the truth would militate against him.

It is thought that enough has been said to show that the dangers
attending the practice of hypnotism have been grossly exaggerated, and
that the sources of danger, which the people are so persistently warned
against, have no existence in fact. The premises laid down will not be
gainsaid by any who understand the law of suggestion. The conclusions
are inevitable. The law of auto-suggestion has been recognized by
Continental writers, as has been shown by extracts from their books;
but they have failed to carry it to its legitimate conclusion when
treating the subject of the legal aspects of hypnotism. It is perhaps
not strange that they should fail in this respect, in view of the
vital interest which physicians have in hypnotism as a therapeutic
agent. But they should remember that the subject is also of vital
interest to students of psychology, and that it is only by a study of
its psychological aspects that hypnotism can be intelligently applied
to the cure of disease. That the phenomena displayed through its
agency possess a significance which far transcends that which attaches
to it as a substitute for pills, is a proposition which will not be
disputed, even by those who seek to monopolize its forces. It is hoped,
therefore, that the psychological student will be graciously permitted
to pursue his studies at least until it is shown that physicians enjoy
such a monopoly of the cardinal virtues that it is unsafe to intrust
the forces of nature in the hands of others.

In the mean time the world at large will continue to believe that the
laws of hypnotism are no exception to the rule that the forces of
nature, when once understood, are designed for the highest good of
mankind; and they will continue to demand that those forces shall not
be monopolized by any man, or set of men, body politic, or corporation.

From what has been said, the supreme folly of legislation to prohibit
experiments in hypnotism is manifest. No one will deny that when a
hypnotist permits himself to exercise his art in private he is in
possession of opportunities which, under other conditions, might give
him an undue advantage over a subject of the opposite sex; but, from
the very nature of things, that advantage is infinitely less than
that enjoyed by physicians in their habitual intercourse with their
patients. Until it is shown that physicians never take advantage of
their confidential relations with their patients; until it is shown
that physicians are exempt from human passions and frailties; or,
at least, until it is shown that physicians are more platonic in
their emotions than the ordinary run of human beings,--the world
will continue to regard their demand that the study of experimental
psychology shall be restricted by legislation to the medical
profession, as an exhibition of monumental impudence. It cannot be
forgotten that it was the medical profession that drove Mesmer into
a dishonored exile and a premature grave for the sole reason that
he healed the sick without the use of pills. The faculty ridiculed,
proscribed, and ostracized every medical man who dared to conduct an
honest investigation of mesmeric phenomena. And now that the scientists
of Europe are compelled to admit the therapeutic value of the science,
they are instant in demand that no one but physicians shall be
permitted to make experiments. It is perhaps natural and right that the
treatment of disease by means of drugs should be restricted to those
who are educated in the proper use of drugs; but the employment of
psychic powers and remedies rests upon an entirely different footing.
Their demand that hypnotism be reserved for their exclusive use rests
not upon their knowledge of its laws, but is founded upon their wilful
ignorance of the fundamental principles which underlie the science.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 20: Hypnotism, p. 337.]

[Footnote 21: Suggestive Therapeutics, p. 214.]

[Footnote 22: Hypnotism, p. 171.]

[Footnote 23: Gregory on Animal Magnetism, p. 4.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI.

PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS.

    Historical Notes.--Mind Cure in Ancient Times.--Bible
    Accounts.--Miracles of the Church.--Healing by the King's
    Touch.--Views of Paracelsus and Pomponazzi.--Bernheim's
    Experiments.--The Modern Schools.--Their Theories.--The
    True Hypothesis applicable to all Systems.--Illustrations
    of the Theory.--Producing a Blister by Suggestion.--Bloody
    Stigmata.--Letters of Blood.--Objective Control of Subjective
    Mind.--Subjective Control of Bodily Functions.--The Necessary
    Mental Conditions.--The Precepts and Example of Christ.--Subjective
    Faith alone required.--Discussion of Various Systems.--Christian
    Science, etc.--General Conclusions.


In the whole range of psychological research there is no branch of the
study of such transcendent practical interest and importance to the
world as that which pertains to its application to the cure of disease.
That there resides in mankind a psychic power over the functions and
sensations of the body, and that that power can be invoked at will,
under certain conditions, and applied to the alleviation of human
suffering, no longer admits of a rational doubt. The history of all
nations presents an unbroken line of testimony in support of the truth
of this proposition. In the infancy of the world the power of secretly
influencing men for good or evil, including the healing of the sick,
was possessed by the priests and saints of all nations. Healing of the
sick was supposed to be a power derived directly from God, and it was
exerted by means of prayers and ceremonies, laying on of hands and
incantations, amulets and talismans, rings, relics, and images, and the
knowledge of it was transmitted with the sacred mysteries.

Numerous examples of the practice of healing by the touch and by the
laying on of hands are related in the Old Testament. Moses was directed
by the Lord to transmit his power and honor to Joshua by the laying on
of hands. Elijah healed the dead child by stretching himself upon the
body and calling upon the name of the Lord, and Elisha raised the dead
son of the Shunammite woman by the same means. It was even supposed
that the power survived his death. The New Testament is full of
examples of the most striking character, and the promise of the Master
to those who believe,--"In my name shall they cast out devils; they
shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover,"--applies to all mankind
to-day as well as to his followers upon whom he had conferred his power
in person. That this power was transmitted to future generations, and
that the saints and others regarded it as the heritage of the Church
and employed it with humble faith, in imitation of the Master, for the
good of mankind, is shown by numerous examples. While the chroniclers
have undoubtedly embellished many actual cures and recited many
fictitious ones, the fact that the saints and others possessed healing
powers cannot be questioned. Thus, Saint Patrick, the Irish apostle,
healed the blind by laying on his hands.

    "Saint Bernard," says Ennemoser, "is said to have restored eleven
    blind persons to sight, and eighteen lame persons to the use of
    their limbs in one day at Constance. At Cologne he healed twelve
    lame, caused three dumb persons to speak, ten who were deaf to
    hear, and, when he himself was ill, Saint Lawrence and Saint
    Benedict appeared to him, and cured him by touching the affected
    part. Even his plates and dishes are said to have cured sickness
    after his death! The miracles of Saints Margaret, Katherine,
    Hildegarde, and especially the miraculous cures of the two holy
    martyrs, Cosmos and Damianus, belong to this class. Among others,
    they freed the Emperor Justinian from an incurable sickness. Saint
    Odilia embraced in her arms a leper who was shunned by all men,
    warmed him, and restored him to health.

    "Remarkable above all others are those cases where persons who were
    at the point of death have recovered by holy baptism or extreme
    unction. The Emperor Constantine is one of the most singular
    examples. Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, had the power of assuaging colic
    and affections of the spleen by laying the patients on their backs
    and passing his great toe over them. The Emperor Vespasian cured
    nervous affections, lameness, and blindness, solely by the laying
    on of his hands. According to Coelius Spartianus, Hadrian cured
    those afflicted with dropsy by touching them with the points of
    his fingers, and recovered himself from a violent fever by similar
    treatment. King Olaf healed Egill on the spot by merely laying
    his hands upon him and singing proverbs. The kings of England and
    France cured diseases of the throat by touch. It is said that the
    pious Edward the Confessor, and, in France, that Philip the First
    were the first who possessed this power. In England the disease was
    therefore called 'king's evil.' In France this power was retained
    till within a recent period. Among German princes this curative
    power was ascribed to the Counts of Hapsburg, and also that they
    were able to cure stammering by a kiss. Pliny says, 'There are men
    whose whole bodies possess medicinal properties,--as the Marsi,
    the Psyli, and others, who cure the bite of serpents merely by the
    touch.' This he remarks especially of the island of Cyprus, and
    later travellers confirm these cures by the touch. In later times
    the Salmadores and Ensalmadores of Spain became very celebrated,
    who healed almost all diseases by prayer, laying on of the hands,
    and by the breath. In Ireland, Valentine Greatrakes cured at first
    king's evil by his hands; later, fever, wounds, tumors, gout, and
    at length all diseases. In the seventeenth century the gardener
    Levret and the notorious Streeper performed cures in London by
    stroking with the hand. In a similar manner cures were performed
    by Michael Medina and the Child of Salamanca; also Marcellus
    Empiricus. Richter, an innkeeper at Royen, in Silicia, cured, in
    the years 1817, 1818, many thousands of sick persons in the open
    fields by touching them with his hands. Under the popes, laying on
    of the hands was called 'chirothesy.'"

Again, Ennemoser says:--

    "As regards the resemblance which the science bears to magnetism,
    it is certain that not only were the ancients acquainted with an
    artificial method of treating disease, but also with somnambulism
    itself. Among others, Agrippa von Nettesheim speaks of this
    plainly when he says, in his 'Occulta Philosophia' (page 451):
    'There is a science, known to but very few, of illuminating and
    instructing the mind, so that at one step it is raised from the
    darkness of ignorance to the light of wisdom. This is produced
    principally by a species of artificial sleep, in which a man
    forgets the present, and, as it were, perceives the future through
    divine inspiration. Unbelieving and wicked persons can also be
    deprived of this power by secret means.'"

Coming down to more recent times, we find that cures, seemingly
miraculous, are as common to-day as at any period of the world's
history. In fact, one unbroken line of such phenomena is presented to
the student of psycho-therapeutics, which extends from the earliest
period of recorded history to the present time. At no time in the
world's history has there been such a widespread interest in the
subject as now; and the hopeful feature is that the subject is no
longer relegated to the domain of superstition, but is being studied by
all classes of people, from the ablest scientists down to the humblest
peasant. The result is that theories almost innumerable have been
advanced to account for what all admit to be a fact, namely, that there
exists a power to alleviate human suffering, which lies not within the
domain of material science, but which can be invoked at the will of man
and controlled by human intelligence.

It would be tedious and unprofitable to discuss at length the numerous
theories advanced by the different sects and schools which have an
existence to-day. It is sufficient to know that all these schools
effect cures of the most wonderful character, many of them taking rank
with the miracles of the Master. This one fact stands out prominent
and significant, namely, that the theories advanced to account for the
phenomena seem to have no effect upon the power invoked.

Paracelsus stated what is now an obvious scientific fact when he
uttered these words:--

    "Whether the object of your faith be real or false, you will
    nevertheless obtain the same effects. Thus, if I believe in Saint
    Peter's statue as I should have believed in Saint Peter himself,
    I shall obtain the same effects that I should have obtained from
    Saint Peter. But that is superstition. Faith, however, produces
    miracles; and whether it is a true or a false faith, it will always
    produce the same wonders."

Much to the same effect are the words uttered in the sixteenth century
by Pomponazzi:--

    "We can easily conceive the marvellous effects which confidence
    and imagination can produce, particularly when both qualities are
    reciprocated between the subjects and the person who influences
    them. The cures attributed to the influence of certain relics
    are the effect of this imagination and confidence. Quacks and
    philosophers know that if the bones of any skeleton were put in
    place of the saint's bones, the sick would none the less experience
    beneficial effects, if they believed that they were near veritable
    relics."

Bernheim,[24] quoting the foregoing passages, follows with a story,
related by Sobernheim, of a man with a paralysis of the tongue which
had yielded to no form of treatment, who put himself under a certain
doctor's care. The doctor wished to try an instrument of his own
invention, with which he promised himself to get excellent results.
Before performing the operation, he introduced a pocket thermometer
into the patient's mouth. The patient imagined it to be the instrument
which was to save him. In a few minutes he cried out joyfully that he
could once more move his tongue freely.

    "Among our cases," continues Bernheim, "facts of the same sort
    will be found. A young girl came into my service, having suffered
    from complete nervous aphonia for nearly four weeks. After making
    sure of the diagnosis, I told my students that nervous aphonia
    sometimes yielded instantly to electricity, which might act simply
    by its suggestive influence. I sent for the induction apparatus.
    Before using it I wanted to try simple suggestion by affirmation.
    I applied my hand over the larynx and moved it a little, and said,
    'Now you can speak aloud.' In an instant I made her say 'a,' then
    'b,' then 'Maria.' She continued to speak distinctly; the aphonia
    had disappeared.

    "'The "Biblioth�que choisie de M�decine,"' says Hack Tuke, 'gives
    a typical example of the influence exercised by the imagination
    over intestinal action during sleep. The daughter of the consul at
    Hanover, aged eighteen, intended to use rhubarb, for which she had
    a particular dislike, on a following day. She dreamed that she had
    taken the abhorred dose. Influenced by this imaginary rhubarb, she
    waked up, and had five or six easy evacuations.'

    "The same result is seen in a case reported by Demangeon.[25]
    'A monk intended to purge himself on a certain morning. On the
    night previous he dreamed that he had taken the medicine, and
    consequently waked up to yield to nature's demands. He had eight
    movements.'

    "But among all the moral causes which, appealing to the
    imagination, set the cerebral mechanism of possible causes at work,
    none is so efficacious as religious faith. Numbers of authentic
    cures have certainly been due to it.

    "The Princess of Schwartzenburg had suffered for eight years from
    a paraplegia for which the most celebrated doctors in Germany and
    France had been consulted. In 1821 the Prince of Hohenlohe, who had
    been a priest since 1815, brought a peasant to the princess, who
    had convinced the young prince of the power of prayer in curing
    disease. The mechanical apparatus, which had been used by Dr. Heine
    for several months to overcome the contracture of the limbs, was
    removed. The prince asked the paralytic to join her faith both to
    his and the peasant's. 'Do you believe you are already helped?'
    'Oh, yes, I believe so most sincerely!' 'Well, rise and walk.' At
    these words the princess rose and walked around the room several
    times, and tried going up and down stairs. The next day she went to
    church, and from this time on she had the use of her limbs."[26]

Bernheim then proceeds to give a _r�sum�_ of some of the histories
of cures which took place at Lourdes, where thousands flock annually
to partake of the healing waters of the famous grotto. The history
of that wonderful place is too well known to need repetition here.
It is sufficient to say that thousands of cures have been effected
there through prayer and religious faith, and the cures are as well
authenticated as any fact in history or science.

The most prominent and important methods of healing the sick now in
vogue may be briefly summarized as follows:

1. _Prayer and religious faith_, as exemplified in the cures performed
at Lourdes and at other holy shrines. To this class also belong the
cures effected by prayer alone, the system being properly known in this
country as the Faith Cure and the Prayer Cure.

2. _The Mind Cure_,--"a professed method of healing which rests upon
the suppositions that all diseased states of the body are due to
abnormal conditions of the mind, and that the latter (and thus the
former) can be cured by the direct action of the mind of the healer
upon the mind of the patient."[27]

3. _Christian Science._--This method of healing rests upon the
assumption of the unreality of matter. This assumed as a major premise,
it follows that our bodies are unreal, and, consequently, there is no
such thing as disease, the latter existing only in the mind, which is
the only real thing in existence.

4. _Spiritism_, which is a system of healing based on the supposed
interposition of spirits of the dead, operating directly, or indirectly
through a medium, upon the patient.

5. _Mesmerism._--This includes all the systems of healing founded on
the supposition that there exists in man a fluid which can be projected
upon another, at the will of the operator, with the effect of healing
disease by the therapeutic action of the fluid upon the diseased
organism.

6. _Suggestive Hypnotism._--This method of healing rests upon the law
that persons in the hypnotic condition are constantly controllable by
the power of suggestion, and that by this means pain is suppressed,
function modified, fever calmed, secretion and excretion encouraged,
etc., and thus nature, the healer, is permitted to do the work of
restoration.

Each of these schools is subdivided into sects, entertaining modified
theories of causation, and employing modified processes of applying
the force at their command. There is but one thing common to them all,
and that is that they all cure diseases.

We have, then, six different systems of psycho-therapeutics, based upon
as many different theories, differing as widely as the poles, and each
presenting indubitable evidence of being able to perform cures which in
any age but the present would have been called miraculous.

The most obvious conclusion which strikes the scientific mind is that
there must be some underlying principle which is common to them all. It
is the task of science to discover that principle.

It will now be in order to recall to the mind of the reader, once more,
the fundamental propositions of the hypothesis under consideration.
They are,--

First, that man is possessed of two minds, which we have distinguished
by designating one as the objective mind, and the other as the
subjective mind.

Secondly, that the subjective mind is constantly amenable to control by
the power of suggestion.

These propositions having been established, at least provisionally,
by the facts shown in the foregoing chapters, it now remains to
present a subsidiary proposition, which pertains to the subject of
psycho-therapeutics, namely:--

_The subjective mind has absolute control of the functions, conditions,
and sensations of the body._

This proposition seems almost self-evident, and will receive the
instant assent of all who are familiar with the simplest phenomena of
hypnotism. It is well known, and no one at all acquainted with hypnotic
phenomena now disputes the fact, that perfect anesthesia can be
produced at the will of the operator simply by suggestion. Hundreds of
cases are recorded where the most severe surgical operations have been
performed without pain upon patients in the hypnotic condition. The
fact can be verified at any time by experiment on almost any hypnotic
subject, and in case of particularly sensitive subjects the phenomena
can be produced in the waking condition. How the subjective mind
controls the functions and sensations of the body, mortal man may never
know. It is certain that the problem cannot be solved by reference to
physiology or cerebral anatomy. It is simply a scientific fact which we
must accept because it is susceptible of demonstration, and not because
its ultimate cause can be explained.

The three foregoing fundamental propositions cover the whole domain of
psycho-therapeutics, and constitute the basis of explanation of all
phenomena pertaining thereto.

It seems almost superfluous to adduce facts to illustrate the wonderful
power which the subjective mind possesses over the functions of the
body, beyond reminding the reader of the well-known facts above
mentioned regarding the production of the phenomena of anesthesia by
suggestion. Nevertheless, it must not be forgotten that the production
of anesthesia in a healthy subject is a demonstration of subjective
power which implies far more than appears upon the surface. The normal
condition of the body is that of perfect health, with all the senses
performing their legitimate functions. The production of anesthesia
in a normal organism is, therefore, the production of an abnormal
condition. On the other hand, the production of anesthesia in a
diseased organism implies the restoration of the normal condition,
that is, a condition of freedom from pain. In this, all the forces of
nature unite to assist. And as every force in nature follows the lines
of least resistance, it follows that it is much easier to cure diseases
by mental processes than it is to create them; provided always that we
understand the _modus operandi_.

It is well known that the symptoms of almost any disease can be induced
in hypnotic subjects by suggestion. Thus, partial or total paralysis
can be produced; fever can be brought on, with all the attendant
symptoms, such as rapid pulse and high temperature, flushed face,
etc.; or chills, accompanied by a temperature abnormally low; or the
most severe pains can be produced in any part of the body or limbs.
All these facts are well known, and still more wonderful facts are
stated in all the recent scientific works on hypnotism. For instance,
Bernheim states that he has been able to produce a blister on the back
of a patient by applying a postage-stamp and suggesting to the patient
that it was a fly-plaster. This is confirmed by the experiments of Moll
and many others, leaving no doubt of the fact that structural changes
are a possible result of oral suggestion. On this subject Bernheim
makes the following observations:--

    "Finally, hemorrhages and bloody stigmata may be induced in certain
    subjects by means of suggestion.

    "MM. Bourru and Burot of Rochefort have experimented on this
    subject with a young marine, a case of hystero-epilepsy. M. Bourru
    put him into the somnambulistic condition, and gave him the
    following suggestion: 'At four o'clock this afternoon, after the
    hypnosis, you will come into my office, sit down in the arm-chair,
    cross your arms upon your breast, and your nose will begin to
    bleed.' At the hour appointed the young man did as directed.
    Several drops of blood came from the left nostril.

    "On another occasion the same investigator traced the patient's
    name on both his forearms with the dull point of an instrument.
    Then, when the patient was in the somnambulistic condition, he
    said, 'At four o'clock this afternoon you will go to sleep, and
    your arms will bleed along the lines which I have traced, and your
    name will appear written on your arms in letters of blood.' He was
    watched at four o'clock and seen to fall asleep. On the left arm
    the letters stood out in bright red relief, and in several places
    there were drops of blood. The letters were still visible three
    months afterwards, although they had grown gradually faint.

    "Dr. Mabille, director of the Insane Asylum at Lafond, near
    Rochelle, a former pupil of excellent standing, repeated the
    experiment made upon the subject at Rochefort, after he was removed
    to the asylum, and confirmed it. He obtained instant hemorrhage
    over a determined region of the body. He also induced an attack
    of spontaneous somnambulism, in which the patient, doubting his
    personality, so to speak, suggested to himself the hemorrhagic
    stigmata on the arm, thus repeating the marvellous phenomena of the
    famous stigmatized auto-suggestionist, Louis Lateau.

    "These facts, then, seem to prove that suggestion may act upon
    the cardiac function and upon the vaso-motor system. Phenomena
    of this order, however, rarely occur. They are exceptional,
    and are obtained in certain subjects only. I have in vain tried
    to reproduce them in many cases. These facts are sufficient to
    prove, however, that when in a condition of special psychical
    concentration, the brain can influence even the organic functions,
    which in the normal state seem but slightly amenable to the
    will."[28]

These facts demonstrate at once the correctness of two of the
fundamental propositions before stated; namely, the constant
amenability of the subjective mind to the power of suggestion, and the
perfect control which the subjective mind exercises over the functions,
sensations, and conditions of the body. All the foregoing phenomena
represent abnormal conditions induced by suggestion, and are, as before
stated, all the more conclusive proofs of the potency of the force
invoked.

If, therefore, there exists in man a power which, in obedience to the
suggestion of another, is capable of producing abnormal conditions in
defiance of the natural instincts and desires of all animal creation,
how much more potent must be a suggestion which operates in harmony
with the natural instinctive desire of the patient for the restoration
of normal conditions, and with the constant effort of nature to
bring about that result! At the risk of repetition, the self-evident
proposition will be restated, that the instinct of self-preservation is
the strongest instinct of our nature, and constitutes a most potent,
ever-present, and constantly operative auto-suggestion, inherent
in our very nature. It is obvious that any outside suggestion must
operate with all the greater potentiality when it is directed on
lines in harmony with instinctive auto-suggestion. It follows that
normal conditions can be restored with greater ease and certainty,
other things being equal, than abnormal conditions can be induced.
And thus it is that by the practice of each of the various systems
of psycho-therapeutics we find that the most marvellous cures are
effected, and are again reminded of the words of Paracelsus: "Whether
the object of your faith be real or false, you will nevertheless obtain
the same effects."

This brings us to the discussion of the essential mental
condition prerequisite to the success of every experiment in
psycho-therapeutics,--faith.

That faith is the essential prerequisite to the successful exercise of
psychic power is a proposition which has received the sanction of the
concurrent experience of all the ages. Christ himself did not hesitate
to acknowledge his inability to heal the sick in the absence of that
condition precedent, which he held to be essential, not only to the
enjoyment of the blessings which he so freely bestowed in this world,
but to the attainment of eternal life. "Oh, ye of little faith," was
his reproof to his followers when they returned to him and announced
the decrease of their powers to heal the sick; thus proving that he
regarded faith as an essential element of success, not only in the
patient, but in the healer also.

If the Great Healer thus acknowledged a limitation of his powers, how
can we, his humble followers, hope to transcend the immutable law by
which he was governed?

"Why is it that our belief has anything to do with the exercise of the
healing power?" is a question often asked. To this the obvious and only
reply is that the healing power, being a mental, or psychic, force,
is necessarily governed by mental conditions. Just why faith is the
necessary mental attitude of the patient can never be answered until we
are able to fathom the ultimate cause of all things. The experience of
all the ages shows it to be a fact, and we must accept it as such, and
content ourselves with an effort to ascertain its relations to other
facts, and, if possible, to define its limitations and ascertain the
means of commanding it at will.

It is safe to say that the statement of the fact under consideration
has done more to retard the progress of the science of psychic healing
than all other things combined. The sceptic at once concludes that,
whatever good the system may do to credulous people, it can never be
of benefit to him, because he "does not believe in such things."
And it is just here that the mistake is made,--a mistake that is
most natural in the present state of psychic knowledge, and one that
is all but universal. It consists in the assumption that the faith
of the objective mind has anything to do with the requisite mental
attitude. The reader is again requested to call to mind the fundamental
propositions of the hypothesis under discussion, namely, the dual
personality and the power of suggestion.

It follows from the propositions of our hypothesis, which need not be
here repeated at length, that the subjective mind of an individual is
as amenable to control by the suggestions of his own objective mind as
it is by the suggestions of another. The law is the same. It follows
that, whatever may be the objective belief of the patient, if he will
assume to have faith, actively or passively, the subjective mind will
be controlled by the suggestion, and the desired result will follow.

_The faith required for therapeutic purposes is a purely subjective
faith, and is attainable upon the cessation of active opposition on
the part of the objective mind._ And this is why it is that, under all
systems of mental therapeutics, the perfect passivity of the patient
is insisted upon as the first essential condition. Of course, it is
desirable to secure the concurrent faith both of the objective and
subjective minds; but it is not essential, if the patient will in good
faith make the necessary auto-suggestion, as above mentioned, either in
words, or by submitting passively to the suggestions of the healer.

It is foreign to the purpose of this book to discuss at length the
various systems of mental therapeutics further than is necessary for
the elucidation of our hypothesis. The theories upon which the several
systems are founded will not, therefore, be commented upon, _pro_
or _con_, except where they furnish striking illustrations of the
principles herein advanced.

Christian science, so called, furnishes a very striking example of the
principle involved in the proposition that the requisite subjective
faith may be acquired without the concurrence of objective belief, and
even in defiance of objective reason. That system is based upon the
assumption that matter has no real existence; consequently we have no
bodies, and hence no disease of the body is possible. It is not known
whether the worthy lady founder of the school ever stopped to reduce
her foundation principles to the form of a syllogism. It is presumed
not, for otherwise their intense, monumental, and aggressive absurdity
would have become as apparent to her as it is to others. Let us see how
they look in the form of a syllogism:--

Matter has no existence. Our bodies are composed of matter. Therefore
our bodies have no existence.

It follows, of course, that disease cannot exist in a non-existent body.

That the above embraces the basis of the system called Christian
science no one who has read the works of its founder will deny. Of
course, no serious argument can be adduced against such a self-evident
absurdity. Nevertheless, there are two facts connected with this system
which stand out in bold relief: One is that it numbers its followers
by the hundred thousand; and the other is that the cures effected by
its practitioners are of daily occurrence and of the most marvellous
character.

The first of these facts demonstrates the truth of the trite saying
that any system of belief, if earnestly advocated, will find plenty
of followers. The second shows in the most conclusive manner that the
faith of the objective mind is not a necessary factor in the cure of
disease by psychic processes.

It seems obvious that no greater demand could be made upon the
resources of our credulity than to tell us that all that is visible
or tangible to our objective senses has no real existence. And yet
that is what the patient of Christian science is invited to believe
as a condition precedent to his recovery. Of course he feels at first
that his intelligence is insulted, and he protests against such a
palpable absurdity. But he is quieted by soothing words, and is told
to get himself into a perfectly passive condition, to say nothing
and to think of nothing for the time being. In some cases patients
are advised to hold themselves in the mental attitude of denying the
possible existence of disease. The essential condition of passivity
being acquired by the patient, the healer also becomes passive, and
assumes the mental attitude of denying the existence of disease in the
patient,--or elsewhere, for that matter,--and affirms with constant
iteration the condition of perfect healthfulness. After a s�ance of
this kind, lasting perhaps half-an-hour, the patient almost inevitably
finds immense relief, and often feels himself completely restored to
health. To say that the patient is surprised, is but feebly to convey
his impressions; he is confounded. The healer triumphantly asks, "What
do you think of my theory now?" It is of little use for him to reply
that he does not see that the theory is necessarily correct because he
was healed. Most likely he fails to think of that, in his gratitude for
restored health. But if he does, he is met by the triumphant response,
"By their fruits ye shall know them." To the average mind, untrained to
habits of logical reasoning, that settles the question; and Christian
science has scored a triumph and secured a follower. He may not be able
to see quite clearly the logical sequences involved, he may be even
doubtful whether the theory is necessarily correct; but not being able
to formulate his objections, he contents himself with the thought that
he is not yet far enough advanced in "science" to understand that which
seems so clear to the mind of his teacher. In any event, he ceases
to antagonize the theory by any process of reasoning, and eventually
believes, objectively as well as subjectively, in the substantial
correctness of the fundamental theory. In the mean time it is easy to
see that his subjective faith has been made perfect by his passivity
under treatment, and that his objective faith has been confirmed by his
restoration to health.

In all systems of healing, the processes, or rather the conditions, are
essentially the same, the first essential condition, as before stated,
being the perfect passivity and receptivity of the patient. That is
always insisted upon, and it is the essential prerequisite, be the
theory and method of operation what they may. The rest is accomplished
by suggestion. Thus, the whole science of mental healing may be
expressed in two words,--passivity, and suggestion.

By passivity the patient becomes receptive of subjective impressions.
He becomes partially hypnotic, and sometimes wholly so. The more
perfectly he is hypnotized, the surer the favorable result. But, in
any case, perfect passivity is sure to bring about a good result.
In the Christian science methods the healer also becomes passive,
and partially self-hypnotized. And this constitutes the difference
between individual healers by that method. The more easily the healer
can hypnotize himself, and the more perfect that condition, the more
powerful will be the effect on the patient. The reason is this:
the suggestions to the subjective mind of the patient are conveyed
telepathically from the subjective mind of the healer. In order to
produce that effect in perfection, it becomes necessary both for
patient and healer to be in a partially hypnotic condition. The
two subjective minds are then _en rapport_. The subjective mind of
the healer, being properly instructed beforehand, then conveys the
necessary suggestions to the subjective mind of the patient. The
latter, being necessarily controlled by such suggestion, exercises
its functions in accordance therewith; and having absolute control of
the sensations, functions, and conditions of the body, it exercises
that control; and the result is that pain is relieved, and the normal
condition of health is restored.

It is not, however, always necessary that either the patient or the
healer should become even partially hypnotized, provided the requisite
faith or confidence is established in the subjective mind of the
patient. In such a case, however, it requires a concurrence both of
objective and subjective faith to produce the best results.

It has been claimed by some mental healers that faith on the part of
the patient is not an essential prerequisite to successful healing.
Doubtless some of the more ignorant ones believe that statement. But
an observation of the methods of treatment employed by some who make
this claim leads one to suppose that the statement often made to their
patients that faith is unnecessary is rather a cunning evasion of the
truth for the very purpose of inspiring faith. Thus, a patient enters
the sanctum of a mental healer, and begins by saying, "I understand
that it is necessary that your patients have faith before they can be
healed. If that is the case, I never can be healed by mental treatment,
for I am utterly sceptical on the subject." To which the ready reply
is, "Faith is unnecessary under my system. I do not care what you
believe, for I can heal you, however sceptical you may be." This is
generally satisfactory to the sceptic. He brightens with hope, and
submits to the treatment, full of the faith that he is to be healed
without faith. It is superfluous to add that by this stroke of policy
the healer has inspired the patient with all the faith required,
namely, the faith of his subjective mind. I will not animadvert upon
the propriety of this course, though I cannot help but contrast it with
that of the Great Healer, who never descended to falsehood, even to the
end that good might come. He always told his followers frankly that
faith was essential; and his words are as true to-day as they were when
he proclaimed to mankind that great secret of occult power. Jesus was
the first to proclaim the great law of faith; and when he uttered that
one word, he epitomized the whole science of psycho-therapeutics.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 24: Suggestive Therapeutics, p. 197.]

[Footnote 25: De l'Imagination, 1879.]

[Footnote 26: Charpignon.]

[Footnote 27: Century Dictionary.]

[Footnote 28: Suggestive Therapeutics, pp. 36, 37.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.

PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Methods classified in Two Divisions.--Mental and Oral
    Suggestions.--Absent Treatment.--Christian Scientists
    handicapped by Absurd Theories.--They claim too much.--The Use
    of Drugs.--Dangers arising from too Radical Change.--Importance
    of Favorable Mental Environment.--Mental Healing requires
    Mental Conditions.--Treatment by Hypnotism.--Bernheim's
    Methods.--Illustrative Cases.--The Practical Value of the
    System.--The Illogical Limitations of the Theory.--Potency of
    Telepathic Suggestion.--Researches of the Society for Psychical
    Research.--Mr. Gurney's Experiments.--They demonstrate the Theory
    of Effluent Emanations.--Diagnosis by Intuition.--Potency of
    Mesmerism.--Permanency of Cures.--Conditions necessary.--The
    Example of Jesus.--Self-healing by Auto-suggestion.


The science of mental therapeutics may be classed in two general
divisions, which are distinguished by the different methods of
operation. The same general principle underlies both, but the results
are attained by different modes of procedure.

The first method is by passivity on the part of the patient, and mental
suggestion by the healer.

The second is by passivity on the part of the patient, and oral
suggestion by the healer.

In ordinary practice both methods are used; that is to say, the oral
suggestionist often unconsciously telepaths a mental suggestion to the
subjective mind of the patient. If he thoroughly believes the truth
of his own suggestions, the telepathic effect is sure to follow, and
always to the manifest advantage of the patient. This is why it is that
in all works on hypnotism and mesmerism the value and importance of
self-confidence on the part of the healer, or, in other words, belief
in his own suggestions, is so strenuously insisted upon. Practice and
experience have demonstrated the fact, but no writer on the subject
attempts to give a scientific explanation of it. But when it is known
that telepathy is the normal method of communication between subjective
minds, and that in healing by mental processes it is constantly
employed, consciously or unconsciously to the persons, the explanation
is obvious.

Again, where mental suggestion is chiefly relied upon, the healer
usually begins operations by making oral suggestions. Thus, the
Christian scientist begins by carefully educating his patient in the
fundamental doctrines of the school, and explaining the effects which
are expected to follow the treatment. The mind is thus prepared by
oral suggestions to receive the necessary mental impressions when the
treatment proper begins. The most effective method of healing employed
by that school consists in what it denominates "absent treatment."
This is effected by purely telepathic means. The patient is absent,
and often knows nothing, objectively, of what is being done for him.
The healer sits alone and becomes passive; or, in other words, becomes
partially self-hypnotized, and addresses the patient mentally, and
proceeds to argue the question with him. The condition of health is
strongly asserted and insisted upon, and the possibility of disease
as strenuously denied. The advantages of this means of treatment are
obvious. The telepathic suggestions are made solely to the subjective
mind of the patient, and do not rise above the threshold of his
consciousness. The subjective mind, being constantly amenable to
control by the power of suggestion, accepts the suggestions offered,
and, having in its turn perfect control of the functions and conditions
of the body, it proceeds to re-establish the condition of health.
In other words, it abandons the abnormal idea of disease; and, in
obedience to the telepathic suggestions of the healer, it seizes upon
the normal idea of health. It will readily be seen that by this method
of treatment the patient is placed in the best possible condition for
the reception of healthful suggestions. He is necessarily in a passive
condition. That is, being unconscious, objectively, of the mental
suggestions which are being made to his subjective mind, he is not
handicapped by antagonistic auto-suggestions arising from objective
doubt of the power of the healer, or of the correctness of his
theories. The latter is the most serious obstacle which the Christian
scientist has to contend with; and it is safe to say that if his school
had not been handicapped by a theory which shocks the common-sense of
the average man, its sphere of usefulness would have been much larger
than it is now. The school is doing a great and noble work as it is,
but it is chiefly among those who are credulous enough to disbelieve
the evidence of their own senses. There is, however, a large and
growing class of people, calling themselves Christian scientists, who
ignore the fundamental absurdities of the theory of the founder of
the sect, and content themselves with the knowledge that the practice
produces good results. Each one of these formulates a theory of his
own, and each one finds that, measured by the standard of results, his
theory is correct. The obvious conclusion is that one theory is as good
as another, provided always that the mode of operation under it does
not depart, in any essential particular, from the standard, and that
the operator has the requisite faith in his own theory and practice.

Another circumstance which handicaps the enthusiastic votaries of
each of the schools consists in the tendency of all reformers to
claim too much for their systems. Forgetting that they have to deal
with a generation of people with a hereditary belief in the power of
medicines to cure disease, a people whose habits of life and thought
are materialistic to the last degree, they expect to change that
belief instantaneously, and cause the new method to take the place
of the old in all cases and under all circumstances. In other words,
they expect to cure all diseases by mental methods alone, and they
seek to prohibit their patients from employing any other physician
or using any medicines whatever. This is wrong in theory and often
dangerous in practice. It may be true, and doubtless is, that one
great source of the power of drugs to heal disease is attributable
to the mental impression created upon the mind of the patient at
the time the drug is administered. This being true, it follows that
when a patient believes in drugs, drugs should be administered. If
Christian science or any other mental method of healing can then be
made available as an auxiliary, it should be employed. But this is just
what the ultra-reformers refuse to do. They insist upon the discharge
of the family physician, and the destruction of all the medicines
in the house, before they will undertake to effect a cure by mental
processes. It frequently happens that the patient is not sufficiently
well grounded in the new faith, or is afflicted with some disease not
readily reached by mental processes, and dies on their hands, when
perhaps he might have been saved by the combined efforts of the family
doctor and the Christian scientist. Be that as it may, when the patient
dies under such circumstances, the Christian scientist must needs bear
the brunt of popular condemnation. It goes without saying that one
such case does more to retard the progress of mental therapeutics in
popular estimation than a thousand miraculous cures can do to promote
it. Again, much harm is done to the cause of mental healing by claiming
for it too wide a field of usefulness. Theoretically, all the diseases
which flesh is heir to are curable by mental processes. Practically,
the range of its usefulness is comparatively limited. The lines of its
field are not clearly defined, however, for the reason that so much
depends on the idiosyncrasies of each individual patient. A disease
which can be cured in one case refuses to yield in another, the mental
attitudes of the patients not being the same. Besides, the mental
environment of the patient has much to do with his amenability to
control by mental processes. In an atmosphere of incredulity, doubt,
and prejudice, a patient stands little chance of being benefited,
however strong may be his own faith in mental therapeutics. Every
doubt existing in the minds of those surrounding him is inevitably
conveyed telepathically to his subjective mind, and operates as an
adverse suggestion of irresistible potentiality. It requires a very
strong will, perfect faith, and constant affirmative auto-suggestion
on the part of the patient to overcome the adverse influence of an
environment of incredulity and doubt, even though no word of that doubt
is expressed in presence of the patient. It goes without saying that
it is next to impossible for a sick person to possess the necessary
mental force to overcome such adverse conditions. Obviously, the mental
healer who undertakes a case under such circumstances, procures the
discharge of the family physician, and prohibits the patient from using
medicines, assumes a very grave responsibility, and does so at the risk
of the patient's life and his own reputation.

Success in mental healing depends upon proper mental conditions, just
as success in healing by physical agencies depends upon proper physical
conditions. This is a self-evident proposition, which the average
mental healer is slow to understand and appreciate.

The success of the physician depends as largely upon his knowledge
of the idiosyncrasies of his patient, his personal habits, his mode
of living, his susceptibility to the influence of medicines, etc.,
as upon a correct diagnosis and medicinal treatment of the disease.
In like manner the success of the mental healer depends largely upon
his knowledge of his patient's habits of thought, his beliefs, his
prejudices, and, above all, his mental environment.

These remarks apply to all methods of mental healing; and, for
the purposes of this book, Christian science may be taken as a
representative of all systems of healing by mental suggestion, as
distinguished from oral suggestion.

Hypnotism, as practised by the Nancy school, may stand as the
representative of mental treatment of disease by purely oral
suggestion. The following extract from Professor Bernheim's able work
on "Suggestive Therapeutics" (chapter i.) embraces the essential
features of the methods of inducing sleep practised by that school:

    "I begin by saying to the patient that I believe benefit is to
    be derived from the use of suggestive therapeutics; that it is
    possible to cure or to relieve him by hypnotism; that there is
    nothing either hurtful or strange about it; that it is an _ordinary
    sleep_, or torpor, which can be induced in every one, and that this
    quiet, beneficial condition restores the equilibrium of the nervous
    system, etc. If necessary, I hypnotize one or two subjects in his
    presence, in order to show him that there is nothing painful in
    this condition, and that it is not accompanied with any unusual
    sensation. When I have thus banished from his mind the idea of
    magnetism and the somewhat mysterious fear that attaches to that
    unknown condition, above all when he has seen patients cured or
    benefited by the means in question, he is no longer suspicious, but
    gives himself up. Then I say, 'Look at me, and think of nothing
    but sleep. Your eyelids begin to feel heavy, your eyes tired. They
    begin to wink, they are getting moist, you cannot see distinctly.
    They are closed.' Some patients close their eyes and are asleep
    immediately. With others, I have to repeat, lay more stress on
    what I say, and even make gestures. It makes little difference
    what sort of gesture is made. I hold two fingers of my right hand
    before the patient's eyes and ask him to look at them, or pass both
    hands several times before his eyes, or persuade him to fix his
    eyes upon mine, endeavoring, at the same time, to concentrate his
    attention upon the idea of sleep. I say, 'Your lids are closing,
    you cannot open them again. Your arms feel heavy, so do your
    legs. You cannot feel anything. Your hands are motionless. You
    see nothing, you are going to sleep.' And I add, in a commanding
    tone, 'Sleep.' This word often turns the balance. The eyes close,
    and the patient sleeps, or is at least influenced. I use the word
    'sleep,' in order to obtain as far as possible over the patients
    a suggestive influence which shall bring about sleep, or a state
    closely approaching it; for sleep, properly so called, does not
    always occur. If the patients have no inclination to sleep, and
    show no drowsiness, I take care to say that sleep is not essential;
    that the hypnotic influence, whence comes the benefit, may exist
    without sleep; that many patients are hypnotized, although they do
    not sleep.

    "If the patient does not shut his eyes or keep them shut, I do
    not require them to be fixed on mine, or on my fingers, for any
    length of time, for it sometimes happens that they remain wide open
    indefinitely, and instead of the idea of sleep being conceived,
    only a rigid fixation of the eyes results. In this case, closure
    of the eyes by the operator succeeds better. After keeping them
    fixed one or two minutes, I push the eyelids down, or stretch them
    slowly over the eyes, gradually closing them more and more, and
    so imitating the process of natural sleep. Finally, I keep them
    closed, repeating the suggestion, 'Your lids are stuck together,
    you cannot open them. The need of sleep becomes greater and
    greater, you can no longer resist.' I lower my voice gradually,
    repeating the command, 'Sleep,' and it is very seldom that more
    than three minutes pass before sleep or some degree of hypnotic
    influence is obtained. It is sleep by suggestion,--a type of sleep
    which I insinuate into the brain.

    "Passes or gazing at the eyes or fingers of the operator are only
    useful in concentrating the attention; they are not absolutely
    essential.

    "As soon as they are able to pay attention and understand, children
    are, as a rule, very quickly and very easily hypnotized. It often
    suffices to close their eyes, to hold them shut a few moments, to
    tell them to sleep, and then to state that they are asleep.

    "Some adults go to sleep just as readily by simple closure of the
    eyes. I often proceed immediately, without making use of passes
    or fixation, by shutting the eyelids, gently holding them closed,
    asking the patient to keep them together, and suggesting at the
    same time the phenomena of sleep. Some of them fall rapidly into a
    more or less deep sleep. Others offer more resistance. I sometimes
    succeed by keeping the eyes closed for some time, commanding
    silence and quiet, talking continuously, and repeating the same
    formulas: 'You feel a sort of drowsiness, a torpor; your arms and
    legs are motionless. Your eyelids are warm. Your nervous system is
    quiet; you have no will. Your eyes remain closed. Sleep is coming.'
    etc. After keeping up this auditory suggestion for several minutes,
    I remove my fingers. The eyes remain closed. I raise the patient's
    arms; they remain uplifted. We have induced cataleptic sleep."

Having succeeded in inducing sleep, or getting the patient in a passive
and receptive condition, the operator then proceeds to suggest the
idea of recovery from the disease with which he is afflicted. On this
subject the author speaks as follows:--

    "_The patient is put to sleep by means of suggestion_; that is, by
    making the idea of sleep penetrate the mind. He is _treated by
    means of suggestion_; that is, by making the idea of cure penetrate
    the mind. The subject being hypnotized, M. Li�bault's method
    consists in _affirming in a loud voice the disappearance of his
    symptoms_.

    "We try to make him believe that these symptoms no longer exist,
    or that they will disappear, the pain will vanish; that the
    feeling will come back to his limbs; that the muscular strength
    will increase; and that his appetite will come back. We profit
    by the special psychical receptivity created by the hypnosis, by
    the cerebral docility, by the exalted ideo-motor, ideo-sensitive,
    ideo-sensorial reflex activity, in order to provoke useful
    reflexes, to persuade the brain to do what it can to transform the
    accepted idea into reality.

    "Such is the method of therapeutic-suggestion of which M. Li�bault
    is the founder. He was the first clearly to establish that the
    cures obtained by the old magnetizers, and even by Braid's hypnotic
    operations, are not the work either of a mysterious fluid or of
    physiological modifications due to special manipulations, but the
    work of suggestion alone. The whole system of magnetic medicine is
    only the medicine of the imagination; the imagination is put into
    such a condition by the hypnosis that it cannot escape from the
    suggestion.

    "M. Li�bault's method was ignored a long time, even by the
    physicians at Nancy. In 1884 Charles Richet was satisfied to
    say that magnetism often has advantages, that it calms nervous
    agitation, and that it may cure or benefit certain insomnias.

    "Since 1882 I have experimented with the suggestive method which I
    have seen used by M. Li�bault, though timidly at first, and without
    any confidence. To-day it is daily used in my clinic; I practise it
    before my students; perhaps no day passes in which I do not show
    them some functional trouble, pain, paresis, uneasiness, insomnia,
    either moderated or instantly suppressed by suggestion.

    "For example: a child is brought to me with a pain like muscular
    rheumatism in its arm, dating back four or five days. The arm is
    painful to pressure; the child cannot lift it to its head. I say
    to him, 'Shut your eyes, my child, and go to sleep.' I hold his
    eyelids closed, and go on talking to him. 'You are asleep, and you
    will keep on sleeping until I tell you to wake up. You are sleeping
    very well, as if you were in your bed. You are perfectly well and
    comfortable; your arms and legs and your whole body are asleep,
    and you cannot move.' I take my fingers off his eyelids, and
    they remain closed; I put his arms up, and they remain so. Then,
    touching the painful arm, I say, 'The pain has gone away. You have
    no more pain anywhere; you can move your arm without any pain; and
    when you wake up you will not feel any more pain. It will not come
    back any more.' In order to increase the force of the suggestion by
    embodying it, so to speak, in a material sensation, following M.
    Li�bault's example I suggest a feeling of warmth _loco dolente_.
    The heat takes the place of the pain. I say to the child, 'You feel
    that your arm is warm; the warmth increases, and you have no more
    pain.'

    "I wake the child in a few minutes; he remembers nothing; the sleep
    has been profound. The pain has almost completely disappeared; the
    child lifts the arm easily to his head. I see the father on the
    days following: he is the postman who brings my letters. He tells
    me that the pain has disappeared completely, and there has been no
    return of it.

    "Here, again, is a man twenty-six years old, a workman in the
    foundries. For a year he has experienced a painful feeling of
    constriction over the epigastrium, also a pain in the corresponding
    region of the back, which was the result of an effort made in
    bending an iron bar. The sensation is continuous, and increases
    when he has worked for some hours. For six months he has been
    able to sleep only by pressing his epigastrium with his hand.
    I hypnotize him. In the first s�ance I can induce only simple
    drowsiness; he wakes spontaneously; the pain continues. I hypnotize
    him a second time, telling him that he will sleep more deeply,
    and that he will remember nothing when he wakes. Catalepsy is not
    present. I wake him in a few minutes; he does not remember that I
    spoke to him, that I assured him that the pain had disappeared. It
    has completely disappeared; he no longer feels any constriction. I
    do not know whether it has reappeared."[29]

The foregoing extracts present the gist of the methods employed by the
Nancy school of hypnotism. The hypnotic condition is induced solely by
oral suggestion, and the disease is removed by the same means. There
can be no doubt of the efficacy of the method, thousands of successful
experiments having been made by the author and his colleagues. These
experiments have demonstrated the existence of a power in man to
control by purely mental processes,--the functions and conditions of
the human body. They have thus laid the foundation of a system of
mental therapeutics which must eventually prove of great value to
mankind. But they have done more. They have demonstrated a principle
which reaches out far beyond the realm of therapeutics, and covers all
the vast field of psychological research. They have demonstrated the
constant amenability of the subjective mind to control by the power
of suggestion. It is not surprising that those who have discovered
this great principle should insist upon its applicability to every
phenomenon within the range of their investigations; but it is strange
that they should fail to recognize a co-ordinate power governed by
the same law, within the same field of operations. Yet this is true
of the modern scientific school of hypnotism to-day. The Nancy school
believes in the power of suggestion, but confines its faith to oral
suggestion. Having demonstrated that _oral_ suggestion is efficacious
in the production of psychic phenomena, they hold that _mental_
suggestion has no power in the same direction. Having demonstrated that
certain phenomena can be induced independently of any so-called fluidic
emanation or effluence from the hypnotist, they hold that no fluidic
emanation is possible. These conclusions are not only illogical, they
are demonstrably incorrect. The Christian scientists are constantly
demonstrating the potency of purely telepathic suggestion by what
they denominate "absent treatment;" _i.e._, treatment of sick persons
without the knowledge of the patients. That there is a power emanating
from the operator who hypnotizes by means of mesmeric passes, seems
to be very well authenticated by the experiments recorded by the
old mesmerists. It must be admitted, however, that many of their
experiments do not conclusively prove anything, for the reason that
they were made before suggestion as a constant factor in hypnotism had
been demonstrated. Recent experiments by members of the London Society
for Psychical Research have, however, now placed that question beyond
a doubt. Their methods of investigation are purely scientific, and
were made with a full knowledge and appreciation of the principle of
suggestion, and of the distinction between mesmerism and hypnotism.

In an account of some experiments in mesmerism, written by Mr. Edmund
Gurney, and recorded in vol. ii. pp. 201-205, of the Proceedings of the
Society referred to, a very interesting experiment is mentioned, which
demonstrates the fact that there is an effluence emanating from the
mesmerizer which is capable of producing very marked physical effects
upon the subject. In this case the subject was blindfolded and allowed
to remain in his normal condition during the whole of the experiment.
His hands were then spread out upon a table before him, his fingers
wide apart. The mesmerizer then made passes over one of the fingers,
taking care not to move his hand near enough to the subject's finger
to cause a perceptible movement of the atmosphere, or to give any
indication in any other way which finger was being mesmerized. The
result was, in every instance, the production of local an�sthesia in
the finger operated upon, and in no other.

Oral suggestion, or any other form of physical suggestion, was here out
of the question; and telepathic suggestion was extremely improbable,
in view of the fact that the subject was in his normal condition, and
consequently not in subjective rapport with the operator. A further
experiment was then tried, with a view of ascertaining whether it was
necessary for the mesmerist to know which finger he was operating upon.
To that end, the operator's hand was guided by the hand of a third
party while the passes were being made; and it was found that the
selected finger was unaffected, when the operator did not know which
one it was.

The first of these experiments demonstrates the fact that there is an
effluence emanating from the mesmerist; and the second demonstrates the
fact that this effluence is directed by his will.

What this effluence is, man may never know. That it is a vital fact in
psychic phenomena is certain. Like many other subtle forces of nature,
it defies analysis. That it exists, and that under certain conditions
not yet very clearly defined it can be controlled by the conscious
intelligence of man, is as certain as the existence of electricity. Its
source is undoubtedly the subjective mind, and it is identical with
that force which, under other conditions, reappears in the form of
so-called spirit-rappings, table-tipping, etc.

Space will not permit the reproduction of further account of the
experiments of the Society for Psychical Research and the reader is
referred to their Proceedings for fuller information. It must suffice
to say that the experiments referred to are completely demonstrative,
not only of the fact that an effluence does emanate from the mesmeric
operator, but that under mesmeric conditions telepathic suggestion is
as potent as are the oral suggestions of the hypnotists.

These facts are beginning to be recognized even by the scientists of
Europe, thanks to the carefully conducted experiments of the Society
for Psychical Research. Professor Li�bault himself, the discoverer
of the law of suggestion, now freely admits the fact that a specific
influence is sometimes exerted by the mesmerizer upon his subject,
which does not arise from oral suggestion. In fact, this doctrine must
soon be, if it is not now, one of the recognized principles of psychic
science.

It will thus be seen that healing by mesmerism is a process clearly
distinct from healing by hypnotism. The latter depends for its
effects wholly upon oral suggestion and the unaided power of the
subjective mind of the patient over the functions and conditions of
his body; whereas the mesmeric healer exerts a positive force of great
potentiality upon the body of the patient, filling it with vitality, in
addition to the oral suggestion of the hypnotist. Not only so, but when
purely mesmeric methods are employed,--that is, when the mesmerist is
in subjective rapport with his patient, as fully explained in a former
chapter,--he is in a condition to convey suggestions telepathically
with as much certainty and potency as he could orally. In point of
fact, telepathic suggestions by a genuine mesmerist are often far more
efficacious than the oral suggestions of a hypnotist, for the simple
reason that the mesmerist, being in a partially subjective condition
himself, is able to perceive by intuition the true condition of the
patient. In other words, the intuitive, or subjective, diagnosis of an
intelligent mesmerist, supposing always the true mesmeric conditions
to be present, is far more likely to be correct than the objective
diagnosis of the hypnotist. For, be it known, it is just as necessary
for the mental healer, whatever may be his processes or his theory,
to be able to make a correct diagnosis of a case as it is for the
allopathic physician. The reason is the same in both cases. The efforts
of the healer must necessarily be exerted in the right direction, or
they will be futile. Hence it is that, other things being equal, the
most intelligent mental healer is always the most successful.

Taking it for granted, then, that there is a fluidic emanation, or
effluence, proceeding from the mesmerist and impinging upon the
patient, it follows that there is a positive dynamic force exerted
upon the patient, either for good or evil, by the employment of
mesmeric methods. That its effects are salutary when properly used for
therapeutic purposes is proved by the concurrent testimony of all who
have intelligently made the experiment, from the days of Paracelsus
down to the present time.

From this it would appear that mesmerism must be the most powerful, in
its immediate effects, of any of the known methods of mental healing.
It combines oral suggestion with mental suggestion, and employs in
addition that mysterious psycho-physical force, or effluence, popularly
known as animal magnetism.

Before leaving this branch of the subject, a few remarks will be in
order regarding the relative value of the different systems of mental
healing now in vogue. It has frequently been charged that healing
by hypnotism and mesmerism is not lasting in its effects,--that no
permanent cure is ever made by these methods. It must be admitted that
there is some ground for these statements, although so sweeping a
charge is by no means justifiable. It is true that in many instances
patients who have been cured by hypnotism and mesmerism have suffered
a relapse, and in some cases the relapse has been worse than was the
original sickness. This of itself constitutes no valid objection to
the means of cure; for it must be admitted that under no system of
treatment is a patient free from the danger of a relapse or of a
recurrence of the disease at some future time. There is, however, this
to be said in regard to hypnotic or mesmeric treatment which does not
apply with the same force to healing by medicines. The success of
mental methods of treatment depending, as it does, upon the mental
condition of the patient and upon the mental impressions made upon
him, it follows that if the mental impressions are not permanent, the
cure may not be permanent. Hence it often happens that a patient,
elated by the success of hypnotic treatment in his case, relates the
circumstances to his friends, especially to his sceptical associates,
only to meet with a storm of ridicule, or at least with expressions
of incredulity or doubt. In such a mental environment his subjective
mind inevitably takes hold of the adverse suggestions, and without
being objectively conscious of it, he has lost faith, the citadel of
his defence is broken down, and if his disease had a mental origin,
he is open to another attack more severe and serious perhaps than the
first. That Christ was fully alive to this danger is shown by the fact
that when he healed a person in private, he rarely failed to place the
solemn injunction upon him, "See thou tell no man." No recorded words
that the Master ever uttered display a more profound knowledge of the
underlying principles of mental healing than these. Modern healers
are not so modest, nor do they seem to understand the prime necessity
for seeing to it that their patients are kept in a proper frame of
mind in reference to their disease and the means employed to cure
them. The general principle of auto-suggestion is recognized by all
scientific hypnotists of the present day; but they fail to recognize
its extreme importance as a therapeutic agent. Properly understood
and applied, auto-suggestion supplies a means of enabling every one
to heal himself, or at least to hold himself in the proper mental
attitude to make permanent the good effects of hypnotic treatment by
others. Many of the pains and ills to which the average man is subject
can be cured by this means, and it should be the first care of every
hypnotist to instruct his patients in this branch of the science.
In this respect the Christian scientists are far in advance of the
hypnotists and mesmerists. They teach their patients how to help
themselves. They organize them into classes, deliver lectures, and give
minute instructions how to treat themselves, as well as how to treat
others. Without knowing it, they in effect teach their patients the
methods of auto-suggestion. Without having the remotest conception of
the real principles which underlie their so-called "science," they have
somehow stumbled upon the machinery of mental therapeutics. To do them
full justice, it must be said that they employ the machinery to good
purpose. They do much good and little harm, and the little harm they
do, generally arises from over confidence in the universal efficacy of
their methods.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 29: Suggestive Therapeutics, p. 206.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII.

A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS.

    Telepathy the Normal Means of Communication between
    Subjective Minds.--Perfect Passivity required for Therapeutic
    Suggestions.--Natural Sleep the most Perfect State of
    Passivity.--Hypnotic Sleep and Natural Sleep identical.--Phenomena
    of Dreams.--Subjective Mind controllable by Suggestion during
    Natural Sleep.--Illustrative Incidents.--Passivity a Necessity on
    the Part of the Operator.--The Subjective Mind can be caused to
    convey Telepathic Messages during Sleep.--Illustrative Experiments.


The science of psycho-therapeutics is yet in its infancy. Thus far just
enough has been learned to stimulate research. It has been demonstrated
that there is a psychic power inherent in man which can be employed for
the amelioration of his own physical condition, as well as that of his
fellows. When this is said, nearly all the ground covered by present
knowledge has been embraced. It is true that many wonderful cures have
been effected, many marvellous phenomena developed. Nevertheless, all
are groping in the dark, with only an occasional glimmering of distant
light shed upon the subject; and this light serves principally to show
how little is now known, compared with what there is yet to learn.

In one view of the situation, however, it may be said that much has
already been accomplished. In the conflict of theoretical discussion,
and by means of the various and seemingly conflicting methods of
operation, certain laws have been discovered which may serve as a basis
for new experiments and new discoveries. It is the province of science
to collate those laws and to classify the facts whereever found, and
from them to try to reason up to the general principles involved. When
this is done, fearlessly and conscientiously, a decided step in advance
will have been made. Some new law may then be discovered, or at least
some new method of operation may be developed, which shall add to the
general stock of knowledge of the science, and enlarge its field of
usefulness.

It is the object of the writer to offer a few observations in this
chapter, in a direction believed to be substantially new, and briefly
to present some conclusions at which he has arrived from a careful
examination of premises which seem to have been well established by the
experiments of others. Before doing so it will be necessary first to
state the premises upon which the conclusions are based; and in doing
this, care will be taken not to travel outside of well-authenticated
experiments.

The first proposition is, that there is inherent in mankind the
power to communicate thoughts to others independently of objective
means of communication. The truth of this general proposition has
been so thoroughly demonstrated by the experiments of members of the
London Society for Psychical Research that time and space will not
be wasted in its further elucidation. For a full treatment of the
subject the reader is referred to "Phantasms of the Living," in which
the results of the researches of that Society are ably set forth
by Messrs. Edmund Gurney, F.W. H. Myers, and Frank Podmore. It is
hardly necessary to remind the intelligent reader that the methods
of investigation employed by these able and indefatigable laborers
in the field of psychical research are purely scientific, and their
works are singularly free from manifestations of prejudice or of
unreasoning scepticism on the one hand, and of credulity on the other.
It is confidently assumed, therefore, that the power of telepathic
communication is as thoroughly established as any fact in nature.

Now, telepathy is primarily the communion of subjective minds, or
rather it is the normal means of communication between subjective
minds. The reason of the apparent rarity of its manifestation is
that it requires exceptional conditions to bring its results above
the threshold of consciousness. There is every reason to believe that
the souls, or subjective minds, of men can and do habitually hold
communion with one another when not the remotest perception of the fact
is communicated to the objective intelligence. It may be that such
communion is not general among men; but it is certain that it is held
between those who, from any cause, are _en rapport_. The facts recorded
by the Society for Psychical Research demonstrate that proposition.
Thus, near relatives are oftenest found to be in communion, as is
shown by the comparative frequency of telepathic communications
between relatives, giving warning of sickness or of death. Next in
frequency are communications between intimate friends. Communications
of this character between comparative strangers are apparently rare.
Of course the only means we have of judging of these things is by the
record of those cases in which the communications have been brought to
the objective consciousness of the percipients. From these cases it
seems fair to infer that the subjective minds of those who are deeply
interested in one another are in habitual communion, especially when
the personal interest or welfare of either agent or percipient is at
stake. Be this as it may, it is certain that telepathic communication
can be established at will by the conscious effort of one or both of
the parties, even between strangers. The experiments of the Society
above named have demonstrated this fact. It will be assumed, therefore,
for the purposes of this argument that telepathic communion can be
established between two subjective minds at the will of either. The
fact may not be perceived by the subject, for it may not rise above the
threshold of his objective consciousness. But for therapeutic purposes
it is not necessary that the patient should know, objectively, that
anything is being done for him. Indeed, it is often better that he
should not know it, for reasons set forth in a former chapter.

The second proposition is that a state of perfect passivity on the part
of the percipient is the most favorable condition for the reception
of telepathic impressions or communications. It needs no argument to
establish the truth of this proposition. It is universally known to be
true, by all who have given the slightest attention to psychological
science, that passivity on the part of the subject is the primary
condition necessary for the production of any psychic phenomenon.
Passivity simply means the suspension of the functions of the objective
mind for the time being, for the purpose of allowing the subjective
mind to receive impressions and to act upon them. The more perfectly
the objective intelligence can be held in abeyance, the more perfectly
will the subjective mind perform its functions. This is why a state
of profound hypnotism is the most favorable for the reception of
suggestions, either oral or mental. That this is more especially true
of mental suggestions is shown by all experiments in mesmerism. It may,
therefore, be safely assumed that the most favorable condition in which
a patient can be placed for the reception of telepathic suggestions
for therapeutic purposes is the condition wherein the functions of his
objective intelligence are, for the time being, entirely suspended.

The third proposition is that _there is nothing to differentiate
hypnotic sleep from natural sleep_. Startling as this proposition may
appear to the superficial observer, it is fully concurred in both by M.
Li�bault and Professor Bernheim.

    "There is no fundamental difference," says the latter,[30] "between
    spontaneous and induced sleep. M. Li�bault has very wisely
    established this fact. The spontaneous sleeper is in relationship
    with himself alone; the idea which occupies his mind just before
    going to sleep, the impressions which the sensitive and sensorial
    nerves of the periphery continue to transmit to the brain, and the
    stimuli coming from the viscera, become the point of departure for
    the incoherent images and impressions which constitute dreams. Have
    those who deny the psychical phenomena of hypnotism, or who only
    admit them in cases of diseased nervous temperament, ever reflected
    upon what occurs in normal sleep, in which the best-balanced mind
    is carried by the current, in which the faculties are dissociated,
    in which the most singular ideas and the most fantastic conceptions
    obtrude? Poor human reason is carried away, the proudest mind
    yields to hallucinations, and during this sleep--that is to say,
    during a quarter of its existence--becomes the plaything of the
    dreams which imagination calls forth.

    "In induced sleep the subject's mind retains the memory of the
    person who has put him to sleep, whence the hypnotizer's power
    of playing upon his imagination, of suggesting dreams, and of
    directing the acts which are no longer controlled by the weakened
    or absent will."

There are, in fact, many analogies between the phenomena of normal
sleep and the phenomena of hypnotism. For instance, it is well known
that the recollection of what occurred during hypnotic sleep is in
exact inverse proportion to the depth of the sleep. If the sleep
is light, the remembrance of the subject is perfect. If the sleep
is profound, he remembers nothing, no matter what the character of
the scenes he may have passed through. The same is true of dreams.
We remember only those dreams which occur during the period when we
are just going to sleep or are just awakening. Profound sleep is
dreamless, so far as the recollection of the sleeper informs him.
Nevertheless, it is certain that we dream continuously during sleep.
The subjective mind is ever awake during the sleep of the body, and
always active. Our dreams are often incoherent and absurd, for the
reason that they are generally invoked by peripheral impressions.
These impressions constitute suggestions which the subjective mind, in
obedience to the universal law, accepts as true; and it always deduces
the legitimate conclusions therefrom. For instance, it is probably
within the experience of every reader that an accidental removal of
the bed-clothing during a cold night will cause the sleeper to dream
of wading through snow, or of sleigh-riding. And the dream will be
pleasant or otherwise just in accordance with the character of the
other attendant peripheral impressions. If the dreamer is in good
health he will dream of pleasant winter scenes and experiences. If his
stomach is out of order, or overloaded, he will have a nightmare, with
a winter setting of ice and snow and all that is disagreeable, dank,
and dismal.

As we have seen in the preceding chapters, the subjective mind reasons
deductively only from premises that are suggested to it, whether the
suggestions are imparted to it by its physical environment, as in
sleep, or by oral suggestion, as in hypnotism, or telepathically, as
in the higher forms of mesmerism. Its deductions are always logical,
whether the premises are true or false. Hence the absurdity of many
of our dreams; they are merely deductions from false premises. The
suggestions or impressions imparted to us during sleep being the result
of accidental surroundings and stimuli, modified by the state of our
health, our mental work during the day, and a thousand other things
of which we can have no knowledge, and which are beyond our control,
are necessarily of a heterogeneous character; and the deductions from
such premises must of necessity be incoherent and fantastic to the last
degree.

It is obvious, therefore, that the subjective mind is amenable to
control by suggestion during natural sleep just the same as it is
during hypnotic, or induced, sleep. It might not be unprofitable in
this connection to enter into a general inquiry as to how far it would
be possible to control our dreams by auto-suggestion, and thus obviate
the discomforts incident to unpleasant nocturnal hallucinations. But
as we are now engaged in a specific inquiry into the question of how
far the subjective mind can be influenced for therapeutic purposes, the
general field of speculation must be left for others. It is sufficient
for present purposes to establish the proposition that the subjective
mind is controllable by the power of suggestion during natural sleep.

Recurring in this connection to the preceding proposition, that "a
state of perfect passivity on the part of the patient is the most
favorable condition for the reception of telepathic impressions or
communications for therapeutic purposes," the conclusion is obvious
that the condition of natural sleep, being the most perfectly passive
condition imaginable, must of necessity be the most favorable
condition for the reception of telepathic suggestions for therapeutic
purposes. It is especially adapted for the conveyance of therapeutic
suggestions, for the reason that for such purposes it is not necessary
that the suggestions or impressions should rise above the threshold of
the patient's consciousness. Indeed, as we have before observed, it is
better that they should not. The object being merely the restoration of
health, it is not necessary that the objective mind should feel, or be
conscious of, the impressions or suggestions made. It is precisely as
it is in hypnotism; the suggestions, whether oral or telepathic, are
made to the subjective intelligence; and, in case of profound hypnotic
sleep, the objective mind retains no recollection of the suggestions.
In either case the subjective mind is the one addressed; and that,
being the central power in control of the functions and conditions of
the body, accepts the suggestions and acts accordingly.

There are not wanting facts which show clearly that the power exists to
convey telepathic messages to sleeping persons, causing them to dream
of the things that the agent desires. As long ago as 1819, Councillor
H.M. Wesermann, of D�sseldorf, recorded, in the "Archiv f�r den
thierischen Magnetismus,"[31] a few experiments of his own which show
this to be true. The following items are reproduced in "Phantasms of
the Living,"[32] from the original article above mentioned:--

    "_First Experiment, at a Distance of Five Miles._--I endeavored
    to acquaint my friend, the Hofkammerrath G. (whom I had not seen,
    with whom I had not spoken, and to whom I had not written for
    thirteen years), with the fact of my intended visit, by presenting
    my form to him in his sleep, through the force of my will. When I
    unexpectedly went to him on the following evening, he evinced his
    astonishment at having seen me in a dream on the preceding night.

    "_Second Experiment, at a Distance of Three Miles._--Madame W., in
    her sleep, was to hear a conversation between me and two other
    persons, relating to a certain secret; and when I visited her on
    the third day, she told me all that had been said, and showed her
    astonishment at this remarkable dream.

    "_Third Experiment, at a Distance of One Mile._--An aged person in
    G---- was to see in a dream the funeral procession of my deceased
    friend S.; and when I visited her on the next day, her first words
    were that she had in her sleep seen a funeral procession, and on
    inquiry had learned that I was the corpse. Here there was a slight
    error.

    "_Fourth Experiment, at a Distance of One-Eighth of a Mile._--Herr
    Doctor B. desired a trial to convince him, whereupon I represented
    to him a nocturnal street-brawl. He saw it in a dream, to his great
    astonishment. (This means, presumably, that he was astonished when
    he found that the actual subject of his dream was what Wesermann
    had been endeavoring to impress on him.)"

It would thus seem to be reasonably well established that the state
of natural sleep is the best possible condition for the reception of
telepathic suggestions for therapeutic purposes.

The next inquiry in order is, therefore, as to what is the best means
of conveying telepathic suggestion to the sleeping patient. In a
previous chapter it has been shown that a successful mesmerizer must
necessarily be in a partially subjective condition himself in order
to produce the higher phenomena of mesmerism. It may, it is thought,
be safely assumed that the phenomenon of thought-transference cannot
be produced under any other conditions. Indeed, it stands to reason
that, inasmuch as it is the subjective mind of the percipient that is
impressed, the message must proceed from the subjective mind of the
agent. In other words, it is reasonable to suppose that, the subjective
or passive condition being a necessity on the part of the percipient
or subject, an analogous condition is a necessity on the part of the
agent or operator. This fact is shown, not only in mesmerism, but in
the methods of Christian scientists. The mesmerist, as we have seen,
quietly fixes his gaze upon the subject and concentrates his mind
and will upon the work in hand, and thus, unknowingly, it may be,
partially hypnotizes himself. The Christian scientist sits quietly by
the patient and concentrates his mind, in like manner, upon the central
idea of curing the patient. And, in either case, just in proportion
to the ability of the operator to get himself into the subjective
condition will he succeed in accomplishing his object, whether it is
the production of the higher phenomena of mesmerism, or the healing of
the sick by telepathic suggestion.

If, then, the passive, or subjective, condition of the agent is
necessary for the successful transmission of telepathic suggestions or
communications, or if it is the _best_ condition for such a purpose, it
follows that the more perfectly that condition is attained, the more
successful will be the experiment. As before observed, the condition
of natural sleep is manifestly the most perfectly passive condition
attainable. It is necessarily perfect, for all the objective senses are
locked in slumber, and the subjective mind is free to act in accordance
with the laws which govern it. Those laws are, it is true, at present
but little understood; but this much has been demonstrated, namely,
that the subjective mind is controllable by the mysterious power of
suggestion, and is always most active during sleep.

Theoretically, then, we find that the most perfect condition either
for the conveyance or the reception of telepathic impressions or
communications is that of natural sleep. The only question that remains
to be settled is whether it is possible for the agent or operator so to
control his own subjective mind during his bodily sleep as to compel or
induce it to convey the desired message to the sub-consciousness of the
patient. To settle this question, we must again have recourse to the
record of the labors and researches of the London Society for Psychical
Research. It might well be inferred that this power must necessarily
be possessed, when we take into consideration the general law of
suggestion, coupled with the fact that the subjective mind is perfectly
amenable to control by auto-suggestion. If the law of suggestion is
valid and universal, the conclusion is irresistible that this power
is inherent in man, even without one experimental fact to sustain it.
Fortunately, we are not left to conjecture in regard to this important
question. The literature of psychical experiment is full of facts which
are demonstrative. Some of the experiments recorded in "Phantasms of
the Living" show that a vastly greater power exists in this direction
than would be required to convey a simple therapeutic suggestion to a
sleeping patient. The following experiments are recorded in "Phantasms
of the Living."[33] In the first case, the Rev. W. Stainton Moses was
the percipient, and he corroborates the following account, written by
the agent:--

    "One evening I resolved to appear to Z at some miles' distance.
    I did not inform him beforehand of the intended experiment,
    but retired to rest shortly before midnight with thoughts
    intently fixed on Z, with whose room and surroundings I was
    quite unacquainted. I soon fell asleep, and awoke next morning
    unconscious of anything having taken place. On seeing Z, a few
    days afterwards, I inquired, 'Did anything happen at your rooms
    on Saturday night?' 'Yes,' replied he, 'a great deal happened. I
    had been sitting over the fire with M, smoking and chatting. About
    12.30 he rose to leave, and I let him out myself. I returned to
    the fire to finish my pipe, when I saw you sitting in the chair
    just vacated by him. I looked intently at you, and then took up a
    newspaper to assure myself I was not dreaming; but on laying it
    down I saw you still there. While I gazed, without speaking, you
    faded away.'"

The next case was recorded by the agent, Mr. S.H.B., at the time of the
occurrence, and his account of it is duly verified by the percipients.
It is as follows:--

    On a certain Sunday evening in November, 1881, having been reading
    of the great power which the human will is capable of exercising,
    I determined, with the whole force of my being, that I would be
    present in spirit in the front bed-room on the second floor of
    a house situated at 22 Hogarth Road, Kensington, in which room
    slept two ladies of my acquaintance,--namely, Miss L.S.V. and
    Miss E.C.V., aged respectively twenty-five and eleven years. I was
    living at this time at 23 Kildare Gardens, a distance of about
    three miles from Hogarth Road; and I had not mentioned in any way
    my intention of trying this experiment to either of the above
    ladies, for the simple reason that it was only on retiring to rest
    upon this Sunday night that I made up my mind to do so. The time
    at which I determined I would be there was one o'clock in the
    morning; and I also had a strong intention of making my presence
    perceptible. On the following Thursday I went to see the ladies in
    question, and, in the course of conversation (without any allusion
    to the subject on my part), the elder one told me that on the
    previous Sunday night she had been much terrified by perceiving me
    standing by her bedside, and that she screamed when the apparition
    advanced towards her, and awoke her little sister, who saw me also.

    I asked her if she was awake at the time, and she replied most
    decidedly in the affirmative; and upon my inquiring the time of the
    occurrence, she replied, "About one o'clock in the morning."

    This lady, at my request, wrote down a statement of the event, and
    signed it.

    This was the first occasion upon which I tried an experiment of
    this kind, and its complete success startled me very much. Besides
    exercising my power of volition very strongly, I put forth an
    effort which I cannot find words to describe. I was conscious of a
    mysterious influence of some sort permeating in my body, and had
    a distinct impression that I was exercising some force with which
    I had been hitherto unacquainted, but which I can now at certain
    times set in motion at will. S.H.B.

The next case of Mr. S.H.B.'s is different in this respect, that the
percipient was not consciously present to the agent's mind on the night
that he made his attempt:--

    On Friday, Dec. 1, 1882, at 9.30 P.M., I went into a room alone and
    sat by the fireside, and endeavored so strongly to fix my mind upon
    the interior of a house at Kew (namely, Clarence Road), in which
    resided Miss V. and her two sisters, that I seemed to be actually
    in the house.

    During this experiment I must have fallen into a mesmeric sleep,
    for although I was conscious, I could not move my limbs. I did not
    seem to have lost the power of moving them, but I could not make
    the effort to do so; and my hands, which lay loosely on my knees,
    about six inches apart, felt involuntarily drawn together, and
    seemed to meet, although I was conscious that they did not move.

    At 10 P.M. I regained my normal state by an effort of the will,
    and then took a pencil and wrote down on a sheet of note-paper the
    foregoing statements.

    When I went to bed on this same night I determined that I would be
    in the front bed-room of the above-mentioned house at 12 P.M., and
    remain there until I had made my spiritual presence perceptible to
    the inmates of that room.

    On the next day (Saturday) I went to Kew to spend the evening,
    and met there a married sister of Miss V. (namely, Mrs. L.). This
    lady I had only met once before, and then it was at a ball two
    years previous to the above date. We were both in fancy dress at
    the time, and as we did not exchange more than half-a-dozen words,
    this lady would naturally have lost any vivid recollection of my
    appearance, even if she had remarked it.

    In the course of conversation (although I did not think for a
    moment of asking her any questions on such a subject) she told
    me that on the previous night she had seen me distinctly upon
    two occasions. She had spent the night at Clarence Road, and had
    slept in the front bed-room. At about 9.30 she had seen me in the
    passage, going from one room to another; and at 12 P.M., when she
    was wide awake, she had seen me enter the bed-room and walk round
    to where she was sleeping, and take her hair (which is very long)
    into my hand. She also told me that the apparition took hold of
    her hand and gazed intently into it, whereupon she spoke, saying,
    "You need not look at the lines, for I have never had any trouble."
    She then awoke her sister, Miss V., who was sleeping with her, and
    told her about it. After hearing this account, I took the statement
    which I had written down on the previous evening from my pocket and
    showed it to some of the persons present, who were much astonished,
    although incredulous.

    I asked Mrs. L. if she was not dreaming at the time of the latter
    experience; but this she stoutly denied, and stated that she
    had forgotten what I was like, but seeing me so distinctly, she
    recognized me at once.

    Mrs. L. is a lady of highly imaginative temperament, and told me
    that she had been subject since childhood to psychological fancies,
    etc.; but the wonderful coincidence of the time (which was exact)
    convinced me that what she told me was more than a flight of
    the imagination. At my request she wrote a brief account of her
    impressions, and signed it.

  S.H.B.

One of the authors of "Phantasms of the Living" (Mr. Gurney) on
one occasion requested Mr. B. to send him a note on the night that
he intended to make his next experiment of the kind, whereupon the
following correspondence ensued:--

  March 22, 1884.

    DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I am going to try the experiment to-night of
    making my presence perceptible at 44 Morland Square, at 12 P.M. I
    will let you know the result in a few days.

  Yours very sincerely,      S.H.B.

The next letter was received in the course of the following week:--

  April 3, 1884.

    DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I have a strange statement to show you respecting
    my experiment, which was tried at your suggestion, and under
    the test conditions which you imposed. Having quite forgotten
    which night it was on which I attempted the projection, I cannot
    say whether the result is a brilliant success, or only a slight
    one, until I see the letter which I posted you on the evening of
    the experiment. Having sent you that letter, I did not deem it
    necessary to make a note in my diary, and consequently have let the
    exact date slip my memory. If the dates correspond, the success
    is complete in every detail, and I have an account signed and
    witnessed to show you.

    I saw the lady (who was the subject) for the first time last night,
    since the experiment, and she made a voluntary statement to me,
    which I wrote down at her dictation, and to which she has attached
    her signature. The date and time of the apparition are specified in
    this statement, and it will be for you to decide whether they are
    identical with those given in my letter to you. I have completely
    forgotten, but yet I fancy that they are the same. S.H.B.

This is the statement:--

  44 Morland Square, W.

    On Saturday night, March 22, 1884, at about midnight, I had a
    distinct impression that Mr. S.H.B. was present in my room,
    and I distinctly saw him whilst I was quite wide awake. He came
    towards me and stroked my hair. I _voluntarily_ gave him this
    information when he called to see me on Wednesday, April 2, telling
    him the time and the circumstances of the apparition, without any
    suggestion on his part. The appearance in my room was most vivid,
    and quite unmistakable.

  L.S. Verity.

Miss A.S. Verity corroborates as follows:--

    I remember my sister telling me that she had seen S.H.B., and that
    he had touched her hair, _before_ he came to see us on April 2.
    A.S.V.

Mr. B.'s own account is as follows:--

    On Saturday, March 22, I determined to make my presence perceptible
    to Miss V. at 44 Morland Square, Notting Hill, at twelve, midnight;
    and as I had previously arranged with Mr. Gurney that I should post
    him a letter on the evening on which I tried my next experiment
    (stating the time and other particulars), I sent a note to acquaint
    him with the above facts.

    About ten days afterwards I called upon Miss V., and she
    voluntarily told me that on March 22, at twelve o'clock, midnight,
    she had seen me so vividly in her room (whilst widely awake) that
    her nerves had been much shaken, and she had been obliged to send
    for a doctor in the morning.

  S.H.B.

Mr. Gurney adds:--

    "It will be observed that in all these instances the conditions
    were the same,--_the agent concentrating his thoughts on the object
    in view before going to sleep_. Mr. B. has never succeeded in
    producing a similar effect when he has been awake."

The foregoing instances have been quoted merely for the purpose
of showing that the power exists in mankind to cause telepathic
impressions to be conveyed from one to another, not only when the
percipient is awake and the agent is asleep, but when both are asleep.
It is true that they do not demonstrate the proposition that the power
can be employed for therapeutic purposes when both are asleep; but the
inference is irresistible that such is the case. They do, however,
demonstrate the existence of a power far greater than one would
naturally suppose would be required to convey a therapeutic suggestion.
In the cases cited, the impressions were brought above the threshold
of the consciousness of the percipients. It may well be inferred that
a power sufficiently great to cause the percipient, in his waking
moments, to see the image or apparition of the agent, or even to dream
of him when asleep so vividly as to remember the dream, must be easily
capable of imparting any thought, impression, or suggestion which is
not required to be raised above the threshold of consciousness.

All that would seem to be required is that the agent, before going
to sleep, should strongly will, desire, and direct his subjective
entity to convey the necessary therapeutic suggestions, influence, or
impressions to the sleeping patient.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 30: Suggestive Therapeutics, pp. 140, 141.]

[Footnote 31: Vol. vi. pp. 136-139.]

[Footnote 32: Vol. i. pp. 101, 102.]

[Footnote 33: Vol. i. pp. 103-109.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV.

A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Recapitulation of Propositions.--Natural Sleep the Best
    Condition attainable both for Healer and Patient.--Demonstrative
    Experiments.--Healing at a Distance of One Thousand
    Miles.--Distance no Obstacle.--Space does not exist for
    the Subjective Mind.--Objective Habits of Thought the only
    Adverse Factor.--Diseases treated.--Strabismus Cured.--Mode of
    Operation.--Not a Good Money-making Scheme.--It Promotes the Health
    of the Healer.--A Method of Universal Utility.--Self-healing
    its Most Important Function.--The Power absolute.--Within the
    Reach of all.--Method of Self-healing.--The Patient's Credulity
    not overtaxed.--The Example of Christ.--Material Remedies not
    to be ignored.--Advice to Christian Scientists.--The Control of
    Dreams.--Practical Conclusions.


It is thought that the following propositions have now been, at least
provisionally, established:--

1. There is, inherent in man, a power which enables him to communicate
his thoughts to others, independently of objective means of
communication.

2. A state of perfect passivity on the part of the percipient is the
most favorable condition for the reception of telepathic impressions or
communications.

3. There is nothing to differentiate natural sleep from induced sleep.

4. The subjective mind is amenable to control by suggestion during
natural sleep just the same as it is during induced sleep.

5. The condition of natural sleep, being the most perfect passive
condition attainable, is the best condition for the reception of
telepathic impressions by the subjective mind.

6. The most perfect condition for the conveyance of telepathic
impressions is that of natural sleep.

7. The subjective mind of the agent can be compelled to communicate
telepathic impressions to a sleeping percipient by strongly willing it
to do so just previous to going to sleep.

The chain of reasoning embraced in the foregoing propositions seems to
be perfect; and it is thought that sufficient facts have been adduced
to sustain each proposition which is not self-evident, or confirmed
by the common experience of mankind. The conclusion is irresistible
that _the best possible condition for the conveyance of therapeutic
suggestions from the healer to the patient is attained when both are
in a state of natural sleep; and that such suggestions can be so
communicated by an effort of will on the part of the healer just before
going to sleep._

It is not proposed herein to detail the many experiments which have
been made with a view of testing the correctness of this theory,
my present object being to advance the hypothesis tentatively,
in order to induce others to experiment as I have done. It must
suffice for the present to state that over one hundred experiments
have been made by the writer and one or two others to whom he has
confided his theory, without a single failure. Some very striking
cures have been effected,--cures that would take rank with the most
marvellous instances of healing recorded in the annals of modern
psycho-therapeutics. It is obvious that details of names and dates
could not properly be given, for the reason that the cures have been
effected without any knowledge on the part of the patients that they
were being made the subjects of experiment. I do not feel at liberty,
therefore, to drag their names before the public without their consent.
Besides, if they were now made acquainted with the facts, their
recollection of the circumstances of their recovery would in many
instances be indistinct; and, as a matter of course, all of them have
attributed their sudden recovery to other causes.

I have taken care, however, in many instances to acquaint third
persons with intended experiments, and to request them to watch the
results; so that I have the means at hand to verify my statements if
necessary.

The first case was that of a relative who had for many years been
afflicted with nervous trouble, accompanied by rheumatism of the most
terrible character. He was subject to the most excruciating spasms
during his nervous attacks of rheumatic trouble, and was frequently
brought to the verge of the grave. He had been under the care of many
of the ablest physicians of this country and of Europe, finding only
occasional temporary relief. An idea of the suffering which he endured
may be imagined from the fact that one of his hips had been drawn out
of joint, by which the leg had been shortened about two inches. This,
however, had been partially restored by physical appliances before the
psychic treatment began. In short, he was a hopeless invalid, with
nothing to look to for relief from his sufferings but death.

The treatment began on the 15th of May, 1890. Two persons were informed
of the proposed experiment, and were requested to note the time when
the treatment began. They were pledged to profound secrecy, and to
this day the patient is not aware that he was made the subject of an
experiment in psycho-therapeutics. After the lapse of a few months, one
of the persons intrusted with the secret met the invalid, and learned,
to her surprise and delight, that he was comparatively well. When asked
when he began to improve, his reply was, "About the middle of May."
Since then he has been able at all times to attend to the duties of his
profession,--that of journalist and magazine-writer,--and has had no
recurrence of his old trouble.

Of course, this may have been a coincidence; and had it stood as a
solitary instance, that would have been the most rational way of
accounting for it. But a hundred such coincidences do not happen in
succession without a single break; and more than a hundred experiments
have been made by this process by myself and two other persons, and
not a single failure has thus far been experienced, where the proper
conditions have been observed. In two cases the patients have not
been perceptibly benefited; but in both of those they were notified
of the intended experiments, and were profoundly sceptical. But these
failures cannot be charged to the account of this method of treatment,
for the simple reason that the fundamental principle of the system was
deliberately violated. That is to say, the best conditions were not
observed,--in that the patient was informed beforehand of what was
intended. In such cases the healer is handicapped by probable adverse
auto-suggestion, as has been fully explained in former chapters. The
principle cannot be too strongly enforced that neither the patient
nor any of his immediate family should ever be informed beforehand
of the intended experiment. Failure does not necessarily follow the
imparting of such information; but when the patient or his immediate
friends are aware of the effort being made in his behalf, there is
always danger of adverse auto-suggestion on the part of the patient,
or of adverse suggestion being made orally or telepathically by his
sceptical friends. The conditions are then no better and no worse
than the conditions ordinarily encountered by those who employ other
methods of mental healing. I have successfully treated patients after
informing them of my intentions; but it was because I first succeeded
in impressing them favorably, and their mental environment was not
antagonistic.

One fact of peculiar significance connected with the case of rheumatism
above mentioned must not be omitted; and this is that the patient was
a thousand miles distant when the cure was performed. Others have been
successfully treated at distances varying from one to three hundred
miles. The truth is, as has been before remarked, space does not seem
to exist for the subjective mind. Experimental telepathy demonstrates
this fact. Cases of thought-transference are recorded where the
percipient was at the antipodes. The only thing that operates to
prevent successful telepathy between persons at great distances from
each other is our habit of thinking. We are accustomed to regard space
as an obstacle which necessarily prevents successful communication
between persons. It is difficult to realize that space is merely a
mode of objective thought, so to speak, and that it does not exist as
an obstacle in the way of subjective transmission of impressions. We
are, therefore, handicapped by a want of faith in our ability in that
direction. In other words, our faith is in inverse proportion to the
distance involved. When we can once realize the fact that distance does
not exist for the soul, we shall find that a patient can be treated
as successfully by telepathic suggestion in one part of the world as
another. The only exception to the rule will be when the patient is at
the antipodes; for then the healer and the patient will not ordinarily
both be asleep at the same time. But space, or distance between the
agent and the percipient, does not enter _per se_ as an adverse element
to modify the effects of telepathic suggestion.

The diseases thus far successfully treated by this process have been
rheumatism, neuralgia, dyspepsia, bowel complaint, sick headache,
torpidity of the liver, chronic bronchitis, partial paralysis, pen
paralysis, and strabismus. The last-named case was not treated by
myself, and I very seriously doubt whether I could have commanded
sufficient confidence to be successful. But a lady, whom I had
instructed in the process, asked me if I thought there was any use
in her trying to cure a bad case of strabismus, her little niece,
about ten years of age, having been thus afflicted from her birth. I
unhesitatingly assured her that there was no doubt of her ability to
effect a cure. Full of confidence, she commenced the treatment, and
kept it up for about three months, at the end of which time the cure
was complete. In this case the best conditions were rigidly adhered to,
no one but myself having been informed of the intended experiment. A
volume could be filled with the details of the experiments which have
been made; but as it is foreign to the purpose of this book to treat
exhaustively any one phase of psychological phenomena, but rather to
develop a working hypothesis applicable to all branches of the subject,
the foregoing must suffice.

Little need be said regarding the mode of operation, as it is apparent
from what has been said that the method is as simple as it is
effective. All that is required on the part of the operator is that
he shall be possessed of an earnest desire to cure the patient; that
he shall concentrate his mind, just before going to sleep, upon the
work in hand, and direct his subjective mind to occupy itself during
the night in conveying therapeutic suggestions to the patient. To that
end the operator must accustom himself to the assumption that his
subjective mind is a distinct entity; that it must be treated as such,
and guided and directed in the work to be done. The work is possibly
more effective if the operator knows the character of the disease
with which the patient is afflicted, as he would then be able to give
his directions more specifically. But much may be left to instinct,
of which the subjective mind is the source. It seems reasonable to
suppose, however, that if that instinct is educated by objective
training it will be all the better. This is, however, a question which
must be left for future experimental solution, not enough being now
positively known to warrant a statement as to how far the healing
power of the subjective mind is, or may be, modified by the objective
knowledge or training of the healer.

Be this as it may, the fact remains that all men possess the power
to alleviate human suffering, to a greater or less degree, by the
method developed in the foregoing pages. For obvious reasons it is
not a method by which money can be made. But it is pre-eminently
a means of laying up treasures where neither moth nor rust can
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. Each one has it in
his power to alleviate the sufferings of his neighbor, his friend,
or the stranger within his gates; but his compensation must consist
in the consciousness of doing good, and in the hope of that reward
promised by the Master to those who do their alms in secret. There
is, nevertheless, a practical and immediate reward accompanying
every effort to heal the sick by the method herein indicated. In
consists in this,--that every earnest effort to convey therapeutic
impressions to a patient during sleep is inevitably followed by a
dreamless sleep on the part of the healer. It would seem that the
subjective mind, following the command or suggestions of the healer,
occupies itself with the work it is directed to do, to the exclusion
of all else; and hence the physical environment of the sleeper fails
to produce peripheral impressions strong enough to cause the dreams
which ordinarily result from such impressions. Following the universal
law, it obeys the suggestions of the objective mind, and persists in
following the line indicated until it is recalled by the awakening of
the bodily senses.

Moreover, therapeutic suggestions imparted during sleep inevitably
react favorably upon the healer; and thus his own health is promoted
by the act which conduces to the health of the patient. And thus it is
that therapeutic suggestion may be likened to the "quality of mercy"
which "is not strained, it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon
the place beneath; it is twice blessed: it blesseth him that gives, and
him that takes."

It is easy to foresee that when the world once understands and
appreciates the wonderful therapeutic powers inherent in the human
soul, a great change will be the result. When it is once understood
that the power exists in every human organism to alleviate physical
suffering by a method at once so simple, so effective, and so mutually
beneficial, it cannot be doubted that a large proportion of the ills to
which flesh is heir will exist only in history.

The most important branch of psycho-therapeutics is, however, yet
to be discussed. It has been shown in this and former chapters that
auto-suggestion plays its subtle _r�le_ in every psychological
experiment. It has been shown that the subjective mind of an individual
is constantly controlled by the suggestion of his own objective mind.
This is the normal relation of the two minds; and when that control
ceases, the person is insane just in proportion to the degree in
which the objective mind has abdicated its functions. This control
is ordinarily exercised unconsciously to the individual. That is to
say, we do not ordinarily recognize the operations of the two minds,
for the simple reason that we do not stop to philosophize upon the
subject of their mutual relations. But when we once recognize the
fact, we have not only arrived at the principle which lies at the
foundation of all true psychological science, but we are prepared
to accept the subsidiary proposition which underlies the science of
mental self-healing. That proposition is, that man can control by
suggestion the operations of his own subjective mind, even though the
suggestion be in direct contravention to his own objective belief.
This is unqualifiedly true, even though the suggestion may be contrary
to reason, experience, or the evidence of the senses. A moment's
reflection will convince any one of the truth of this proposition.
It is auto-suggestion that fills our asylums with monomaniacs. That
long-continued and persistent dwelling upon a single idea often results
in chronic hallucination, is a fact within the knowledge of every
student of mental science. That it often happens that a monomaniac
identifies himself with some great personage, even with the Deity, is
a fact within common knowledge. What gives rise to such hallucinations
is not so well known; but every student of the pathology of insanity
will verify the statement that auto-suggestion is the primary factor
in every case. The patient, who is usually a monumental egotist to
start with, begins by imagining himself to be a great man; and by
long-continued dwelling upon the one thought he ends by identifying
himself with some great historical character whom he specially admires.
If he is afflicted with some nervous disorder which causes him to pass
easily and habitually into the subjective condition, the process of
fastening the hallucination upon his mind is easy and rapid, and he
is soon a fit subject for a lunatic asylum. But, whatever physical
condition may be a necessary factor in producing such hallucinations,
the fact remains that auto-suggestion is the primary cause.

The subject is introduced here merely to illustrate the power and
potency of auto-suggestion, even when the suggestion is against
the evidence of reason and sense. It must not be forgotten that
an auto-suggestion which produces a hallucination such as has been
described, operates on the lines of strongest resistance in nature. If,
therefore, such results can be produced when opposed by the strongest
instincts of our nature, how much easier must it be to produce equally
wonderful results when operating in harmony with those instincts, and,
hence, on the lines of least resistance.

It is self-evident, therefore, that auto-suggestion can be employed
to great advantage for therapeutic purposes. Indeed, the power of
self-help is the most important part of mental therapeutics. Without
it the science is of comparatively little value or benefit to mankind.
With it goes the power to resist disease,--to prevent sickness, as
well as to cure it. The old axiom, that "an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure," holds good in psycho-therapeutics as well as
in material remedies, and he who obtains the power to hold himself
in the mental attitude which enables him to resist the encroachments
of disease has mastered the great secret of mental medicine. That it
can be done by any one of ordinary intelligence, is a fact which has
been demonstrated beyond question. The best workers in the field of
Christian science give more attention to teaching their pupils and
patients how to help themselves than they do to instructing them how to
help others. And this is the secret of the permanence of their cures,
as has been fully explained in other chapters of this book. The process
by which it can be done is as simple as are the laws which govern the
subject-matter.

The patient should bear in mind the fundamental principles which lie at
the foundation of mental therapeutics,--

1. The subjective mind exercises complete control over the functions
and sensations of the body.

2. The subjective mind is constantly amenable to control by the
suggestions of the objective mind.

3. These two propositions being true, the conclusion is obvious,
that the functions and sensations of the body can be controlled by
suggestions of the objective mind.

The whole science of psycho-therapeutics is embraced in the foregoing
propositions. They contain all that a patient, who undertakes to heal
himself or to ward off the encroachments of disease, needs to know.
The process of making a particular application of these principles is
equally simple, and must be obvious to the intelligent reader. At the
risk of repetition, a few general directions will be given.

We will take, for illustration, a simple case of nervous headache,
and suppose that the patient resolves to cure himself. He must, first
of all, remember that the subjective mind is to be treated precisely
as though it were a separate and distinct entity. The suggestion must
first be made that the headache is about to cease; then, that it is
already ceasing; and, finally, that it has ceased. These suggestions
should be made in the form of spoken words, and they should be
steadily persisted in until the desired effect is produced. A constant
reiteration of the declaration that the head is better will inevitably
produce the desired result; and, when the effect is distinctly felt,
the declaration should be boldly made that the pain has entirely
ceased. If any remnants of the pain are felt, the fact should be
ignored, and the suggestion persisted in that it has ceased. This
should be followed by the declaration that there will be no return of
the symptoms; and this should be made with an air, tone, and feeling of
perfect confidence.

The only practical difficulty and obstacle in the way of success with
a beginner lies in the fact that at first he lacks confidence. The
education of his whole life has been such as to cause him to look with
distrust upon any but material remedies, and there is a disinclination
to persist in his efforts. But he should remember that it is the
suggestions conveyed by this very education that he is now called upon
to combat, neutralize, and overcome by a stronger and more emphatic
counter-suggestion. If he has the strength of will to persist until he
is cured, he will find that the next time he tries it there will be
much less resistance to overcome. Having once triumphed, the reasoning
of his objective mind no longer interposes itself as an obstruction,
but concurs in the truth of his suggestions. He then possesses both
objective and subjective faith in his powers, and he finds himself
operating on a line of no resistance whatever. When he has attained
this point, the rest is easy; and he will eventually be able to effect
an instantaneous cure of his headache, or any other pain, the moment he
finds himself threatened with one. These remarks apply, of course, to
every disease amenable to control by mental processes.

It will be observed that in the process of applying the principles of
auto-suggestion to the cure of disease the patient is not called upon
to tax his own credulity by any assertion that is not a demonstrable
scientific truth. He is not called upon to deny the existence of
matter, nor does he find it necessary to deny the reality of the
disease which affects him. In short, he is not called upon to deny
the evidence of his senses, to assert a manifest impossibility, nor
to maintain an exasperating absurdity as a condition precedent to his
recovery. The fact that cures can be made and are constantly being made
by those who instruct their patients that a denial of the existence
of matter and of the reality of disease is a necessary condition to
their recovery, is the strongest possible evidence of the truth of
the proposition that the subjective mind is constantly amenable to
control by the power of suggestion. For it is a fundamental truth in
psycho-therapeutics that no cure ever was, or ever can be, effected by
mental processes until the subjective mind of the patient is impressed
with a belief in the efficacy of the means employed. It is obvious,
however, that it is more difficult to impress a manifest absurdity upon
the subjective mind of a man of common-sense than it is to impress him
with a belief in a demonstrable scientific truth. Hence it is that,
by methods now in vogue, both healer and patient are handicapped just
in proportion to the tax laid upon their credulity. The point is,
that in impressing a patient with a new scientific truth we should
seek to make it as simple as possible, and avoid anything which will
shock his common-sense. Christ enjoined upon his followers the simple
scientific fact that faith on their part was a condition precedent to
their reception of the benefits of his healing power; and he compelled
them to believe, by publicly demonstrating that power. He would have
had little success among the people with whom he had to deal if he had
begun his treatment by telling them that they had no disease; that
leprosy is a figment of the imagination, and has no existence except in
the mind; or that blindness is merely blindness of the mind, and not of
the body; and that the body itself has no existence except as a form of
belief. He even resorted to material remedies, as in the case of the
blind man, when "He spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle,
and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, and said unto
him, Go, wash in the Pool of Siloam. He went his way therefore, and
washed, and came seeing."[34]

The Christian scientist would doubtless say that the clay and the
subsequent washing in the Pool of Siloam did no good, except as they
acted through the mind. This may be true; but in either case it teaches
a valuable lesson, which it would be well for all classes of mental
healers to remember. If the clay had a curative effect, it shows that
the Master did not disdain to employ material remedies as an auxiliary
to his healing power. If, on the other hand, it possessed no curative
power, it shows that the Great Healer did not hesitate to employ any
legitimate means at hand to confirm and increase the faith of the
patient.

But this is a digression which pertains rather to the general
subject of mental healing than to that of self-healing, which we are
discussing. It is believed that the few simple rules herein laid down
will enable any one of ordinary intelligence to become proficient, by
a little practice, in the science of self-healing. It is not a mere
theory, without practice, which has been here developed. It has been
demonstrated over and over again to be eminently practical, not only
as a means of healing disease, but as a means of warding off its
encroachments. Indeed, its chief value will eventually be found to
consist in the almost unlimited power which it gives one to protect
himself from contracting disease. To do that it is only necessary to
hold one's self in the mental attitude of denying the power of disease
to obtain the mastery over him. When the patient recognizes the first
symptoms of approaching illness, he should at once commence a vigorous
course of therapeutic auto-suggestion. He will find prevention much
easier than cure; and by persistently following such a course he
will soon discover that he possesses a perfect mastery over his own
health. In this connection it must not be forgotten that the method
of healing during sleep is as applicable to self-healing as it is to
healing others. Indeed, perfect rest and recuperative slumber can be
obtained under almost any circumstances at the word of command. Dreams
can be controlled in this way. If one is troubled by distressing or
harassing dreams, from whatever cause, he can change their current, or
prevent them altogether, by energetically commanding his subjective
mind to do so. It is especially efficacious for this purpose to direct
his subjective mind to employ itself in healing some sick friend. If
one habitually does this at the time of going to sleep, he will not
only be certain to obtain recuperative sleep for himself, but he will
procure that contentment and peace of mind which always result from a
consciousness of doing good to his fellow-creatures. The exercise of
the power to heal in this way is never a tax upon the vital energies of
the healer, but always redounds to his own benefit as well as to that
of the patient. The reason of this is obvious. The normal condition of
the subjective mind during the sleep of the body and the quiescence of
the objective faculties is that of constant activity. This activity,
under ordinary conditions, entails no loss of vital power on the part
of the sleeper. On the contrary, that is the period of his rest and the
means of his recuperation. If the activities of his subjective mind are
directed into pleasant channels, his bodily rest is perfect, and his
recuperation complete.

It is for this reason that the method of healing during sleep is
better for all concerned than any other system of mental healing yet
discovered. It follows the lines of nature, in that it employs the
subjective powers at a time when they are normally active; and it
employs them in such a way that the ordinary peripheral impressions,
which often disturb the sleeper and produce unpleasant dreams, are
overcome by a more potent suggestion. Any other method of mental
healing, where the subjective powers of the healer are called into
action, entails a certain loss of vital power on his part, for the
simple reason that subjective activity during waking moments is
abnormal. It is true that when the work is not carried to excess the
physical exhaustion may not be perceptible; but any Christian scientist
will testify that any great amount of effort in the line of his work
produces great physical exhaustion. And it is noticeable that this
exhaustion ensues in exact proportion to the success of his treatment.
This success being in proportion to the subjective power exerted, it
is reasonable to infer that subjective activity during waking hours
and physical exhaustion bear to each other the relation of cause and
effect.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 34: John ix. 6.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV.

THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    If a Man die, shall he live again?--The Problem not solved by
    Spiritistic Phenomena.--The Phenomena admitted.--Their Supernatural
    Origin denied.--Explained by the Hypothesis.--Subsidiary
    Hypothesis.--An Intelligent Dynamic Force.--Its
    Characteristics.--Limited by Medium's Intelligence.--It is
    controlled by Suggestion.--Phenomena fail in Presence of
    Scepticism.--Reasons.--Mediumistic Frauds.--The Primary
    Lesson in Spiritistic Investigation.--Mediums not necessarily
    dishonest.--Their Honest Belief in the Phenomena.--Suggestion
    explains all.--Illustrations from Hypnotism.--Convincing Character
    of Alleged Communications.--Telepathic Explanations.--General
    Conclusions.


The next subject which claims our attention in connection with the
hypothesis under consideration is that of modern spiritism. It is
approached with much diffidence and some misgivings, not because of any
doubt as to the applicability of the hypothesis to the vast range of
so-called spiritual phenomena, but because of the transcendent interest
and importance of the subject to all mankind. It cannot be forgotten
that millions of human beings base their hopes of a life beyond the
grave upon their belief that in the phenomena of spiritism they have
tangible evidence of the immortality of the soul, and that by means of
such phenomena they can be put into communication with the spirits of
the loved ones who have gone before. The fact cannot be ignored that
there are millions of stricken hearts whose wounds have been healed
by the consolation afforded by that conviction. The great question,
"If a man die, shall he live again?" has been by these phenomena
satisfactorily answered for many whom revealed religion failed to
satisfy, for many whose reasoning powers have failed to grasp the logic
of the theologian. It were an unwelcome task to throw a shade of doubt
upon the validity of evidence which to many seems to be "confirmation
strong as proofs of Holy Writ;" and if in the perusal of the following
pages such doubt arises, the reader is begged to discriminate between
the question of the validity of evidence and the question of fact.
For, be it remembered, I shall not undertake to prove that the souls
of men do not live after the death of the body. That question stands
just where it has always stood. It is a problem which, outside of
revelation, is no nearer a solution than it was when Job propounded the
momentous question. Neither will I undertake to say that the spirits
of the dead do not and cannot communicate with the living. I do not
know. But I do undertake to say, and will attempt to prove, that the
phenomena of spiritism, so-called, do not constitute valid evidence
of the ability of spirits of the dead to hold intercourse with the
living. In doing so, no attempt will be made to deny the phenomena of
spiritism. On the contrary, I shall not only admit the possibility
of every phenomenon alleged by any respectable number of reputable
witnesses to have occurred, but I shall also assume the substantial
accuracy of the general statements made by spiritists regarding the
leading phenomena of spiritism. But I shall attempt to explain their
origin on other grounds than the supposition that they are caused by
the spirits of the dead. In other words, I admit the alleged phenomena,
but deny the alleged cause.

I will not waste time, however, by attempting to prove by experiments
of my own, or of others, that such phenomena do occur. It is too
late for that. The facts are too well known to the civilized world
to require proofs at this time. The man who denies the phenomena of
spiritism to-day is not entitled to be called a sceptic, he is simply
ignorant; and it would be a hopeless task to attempt to enlighten him.
I shall indulge in the hope, however, that by explaining the origin of
the phenomena on rational principles, and thus removing them from the
realm of the supernatural, those who now assume to be sceptical may be
induced to investigate for themselves. It is easy to deny the existence
of that for which we cannot account by reference to known laws, and
it is easy to believe in that which can be thus explained. This is
especially true in regard to phenomena which are popularly attributed
to a supernatural origin. Modern scientists have an easy way of
treating such phenomena, which consists in denying their existence and
refusing to investigate. Such men would plug their own ears and deny
the phenomenon of thunder if they could not account for it by reference
to laws with which they are familiar. And such a proceeding would be no
more senseless than, at this day, to deny the phenomena of spiritism.

In justice, however, to those scientists who have sought to investigate
the subject, and have failed to witness the phenomena promised, it
must be said that in many instances their failure is attributable, not
to any fault of their own, or lack of earnest purpose on their part,
but to a want of knowledge of the fundamental laws which pertain to
the production of such phenomena. The reasons for the frequent failure
to produce psychic phenomena in presence of avowed sceptics has been
fully discussed in a previous chapter of this book, to which the reader
is referred. But at the risk of repetition they will be restated in
their proper place in this chapter, as they pertain to the subject of
so-called spirit phenomena.

The laws which govern the production of the phenomena under
consideration are precisely the same as those which pertain to all
the other phenomena which have been discussed; and the fundamental
propositions of our hypothesis apply with equal force to them all.
Again, the reader is asked to recall those propositions, in order that
their force and logical sequence may remain clear to his mind in this
connection. They are:--

1. The mind of man is dual in its nature,--objective and subjective.

2. The subjective mind is constantly controlled by suggestion.

These two propositions would seem to have been so well established
as to need no further elucidation at this time. The subsidiary
proposition, which applies to the phenomena under consideration, is
that,--

3. The subjective mind, or entity, possesses physical power; that is,
the power to make itself heard and felt, and to move ponderable objects.

This may seem at first glance to be begging the question; but its truth
must be assumed provisionally, for the sake of the argument which
follows. It will readily be seen that if those three propositions
can be established, all the physical phenomena of spiritism can be
accounted for on the ground that living man possesses inherently the
power to produce them. And this is the position which we must assume,
for it appears to be the truth.

It must be acknowledged by all who have witnessed, under test
conditions, any of the physical phenomena, that there is a dynamic
force residing somewhere that is capable of moving ponderable objects
without physical contact, and that this force, whatever it is, or
from whatever source it emanates, possesses intelligence, oftentimes
to a remarkable degree. Now, this intelligent force either emanates
from the spirits of the dead, or it does not. If it does not, it
necessarily follows that it emanates from the living. That this last
supposition is the true one is evidenced by many of the characteristics
of the intelligence which it manifests, among which the following are
prominent:--

It is essentially a human intelligence, and neither rises above nor
sinks below the ordinary intelligence of humanity.

The intelligence is always on a level with that of the medium through
whom it manifests itself. That is, it never rises so far above that
of the medium as to preclude the possibility of its having its origin
in the medium's subjective mind. That it often rises above the
medium's known objective intelligence, is well known and admitted.
But we have already seen what remarkable powers the subjective mind
possesses in certain lines of intellectual activity, and with what
limitations it is hedged about; and we find that the intellectual feats
of mediums possess all the characteristics belonging to subjective
intelligence,--the same wonderful powers, and the same limitations.
That so-called spirit communications always correspond to the nature
of the medium's mind and character, and are limited by his capacity,
is admitted by all the ablest writers on spiritism; and their greatest
ingenuity is taxed to account for the fact. Alleged communications from
the greatest philosophers who have gone before, amount to the merest
twaddle when filtered through an ignorant medium.

Again, we find that the intelligence is controllable by the power of
suggestion. This is shown in the readiness with which "spirits" can be
made to respond to calls made upon them, whether they have any real
existence or not. It is well known that any one can as readily obtain
a communication from an imaginary person as from a real one, from a
living person as from the dead, providing the medium does not happen
to know the facts. The writer has had frequent and very affectionate
communications from an imaginary dead sister, and has occasionally had
a very touching communication from himself, the medium believing the
name to represent a dead brother. The fact that he never had either
brother or sister made the communication all the more convincing.

This perfect amenability to control by suggestion is evinced in another
most remarkable way. It is well known to every person who has been
in the habit of attending spiritual s�ances how necessary it is that
"harmonious conditions" should prevail. The very presence of an avowed
sceptic will often prevent any manifestations. It frequently happens
that some one present remarks, in a despairing tone, that he does not
expect any manifestations, "because it always happens that when I am
present no communications can be had." When such a remark is made, the
chances are ten to one that the "spirits" will refuse to respond. Why
this happens, spiritists have laboriously attempted to explain, but
never satisfactorily, except to themselves. The fact that a spirit,
possessing sufficient power to move a table, raise a piano to the
ceiling, or levitate the medium, should be paralyzed in presence of
one who does not believe in spirits, is simply inexplicable, except
upon the one hypothesis, namely, that the power evoked is that of the
subjective mind of the medium, which is amenable to control by the
mysterious power of suggestion. It is inconceivable that the spirit
of Napoleon Bonaparte, who, when living, swayed the destinies of
nations, used kings and popes as his puppets, and led his hosts to
successful battle against the combined armies of Europe, should, when
dead, shrink, abashed and powerless, in presence of some one man who
happens not to believe in spiritism. But it can be readily understood
how a s�ance should prove a failure when we assume that the power
that moves the table or writes the communications is exercised by the
subjective intelligence of the medium, and that the presence of an
avowed sceptic operates as an ever-present and all-potent suggestion
that the promised manifestations are impossible in his presence. It
is in strict accordance with the universal law of suggestion that
such should be the result. It is this constant amenability to control
by suggestion which always hampers mediums when they are giving test
s�ances in the presence of sceptical investigators; and I undertake
to say that no medium ever was, or ever can be, powerful enough to
produce his phenomena under test conditions in presence of a hostile
and aggressively sceptical investigating committee. It is no fault of
the medium that this is the case, and it is no test whatever of the
genuineness of his phenomena. But it is presumptive, if not conclusive,
evidence that the source of his phenomena resides within himself, and
hence is amenable to the universal law which governs the action of
all subjective intelligence and power. Neither is it any reflection
upon the sincerity of the investigator that he fails to witness the
phenomena that have been promised. His ignorance of the law which
governs the subject-matter, together with his desire to be frank and
honest enough with the medium to put him in possession of a knowledge
of his sentiments and prejudices, leads him unwittingly to place an
insuperable barrier in the way of success. It unfortunately happens
that many professional mediums, despairing of success in producing
the genuine phenomena, and more than ordinarily anxious to earn the
reward of success, will, under such circumstances, resort to fraud
and legerdemain. The temptation to do so is great when he reflects
upon how much is at stake, the immediate monetary reward promised
being the least consideration. His professional pride, his love of
approbation, his hope of future fame and emolument in case he succeeds
in convincing a sceptical scientific investigator,--all operate to
constitute a temptation too great to be always successfully withstood.
Besides, he knows that, under favorable conditions, he can produce the
genuine phenomena, that he has produced them again and again, and he
quiets his conscience by reflecting that it can do no harm to resort to
legerdemain to simulate that which he knows to have a genuine existence.

In this connection it may be well to state what must already be obvious
to the intelligent reader; namely, that the only way to secure the
production of genuine phenomena is, first, to secure the confidence of
the medium by assuming to be in hearty sympathy with him, and by giving
him to understand that you thoroughly believe in his honesty and his
power to produce genuine phenomena. Give him all the time he wants,
and assure him that you are in no hurry; remembering always that quiet
passivity and undisturbed serenity of mind on the part of a medium is
an indispensable prerequisite to success, not only in producing the
phenomena, but in entering the subjective condition. It is precisely
the same in this respect as it is in hypnotism. The condition of the
medium, when in a trance or partial trance, is precisely the condition
of a hypnotized person, and he is subject to the same laws, and the
same conditions are necessary and indispensable to his success. Every
hypnotist knows that it would be madness to antagonize a hypnotic
subject by suggesting to him in advance that he is an impostor, or
that hypnotic phenomena are mere humbug, and then expect to hypnotize
him and produce the phenomena. When investigators realize this one fact
they will have taken the primary lesson in spiritistic investigation.
Every one who understands the first principles of hypnotism knows
what folly it would be to subject the science to the test of allowing
a sceptical investigator to take a subject in hand and begin the
operation of trying to hypnotize him by assuring him that hypnotism
is imposture, and all subjects are mere pretenders. And yet one who
investigates hypnotism in that way does, in effect, precisely what the
sceptical investigator of spiritistic phenomena does when he avows his
scepticism to the medium in advance. If investigators would observe
the rule here suggested, and always endeavor to put the medium at his
ease and accede to all the conditions prescribed by him, instead of
insisting upon test conditions of their own devising, they would soon
find that they would witness all the phenomena desired, and under
conditions that preclude the possibility of fraud or legerdemain. Any
other course almost of necessity defeats the object sought.

It will be seen, therefore, that a failure to produce phenomena at
a given time does not necessarily indicate fraud on the part of the
medium; and in strict justice to professional mediums, who as a class
have been brought into disrepute by the fraudulent practices of some
of their number, it must be said that the detection of a medium in
fraudulent practices does not _per se_ prove that he was consciously
guilty; for it is an undoubted fact that when a medium is unconscious,
and his subjective mind is in control, it often acts capriciously,
and presumably fraudulent practices might be indulged in without the
objective knowledge or consent of the medium. Therefore, until the
laws governing the subject-matter are better understood, we should
extend the broadest charity over the professional medium, except in
cases where it is discovered that the paraphernalia necessary for the
perpetration of fraud have been prepared by the medium in advance.

At this point the question will naturally be asked, "How can a medium,
professional or otherwise, be entitled to credit for honesty, who
represents himself as being able to hold communion with the spirits
of the dead, or to be an instrument through which communications
from spirits of the dead can be obtained, if, in point of fact, such
communications have their origin wholly within his own personality?"

This is perhaps the most pertinent and the most far-reaching
question that could be formulated in regard to the hypothesis under
consideration. If it could not be fairly answered from a purely
scientific standpoint, our hypothesis would not be worthy of further
discussion; for it is simply impossible to presuppose that all the
immense number of mediums, professional and private, who may be
found in all ranks of society throughout the civilized world, are
deliberately and consciously perpetrating a fraud upon mankind. On
the contrary, I here take occasion to say that there is no system of
religious belief which is so thoroughly fortified by facts as that of
spiritism, when its phenomena are viewed from the standpoint of the
investigator who is unacquainted with the latest scientific discoveries
in the domain of experimental psychology. But with that knowledge in
possession, the evidential value of the phenomena of spiritism is
vastly depreciated, and the high character of the medium for truth and
sincerity loses all its weight as a factor in the case.

The intelligent reader has already anticipated the answer to the
foregoing question. It is simply this: that the subjective mind of
the medium, being controlled by suggestion, believes itself to be the
spirit of any deceased person whose name is suggested. It has been
educated to that belief through the objective education and environment
of the individual. It is, by the laws of its being, absolutely
controlled by the objective belief of the medium, and the suggestions
embraced in that belief. It is true that it often acts capriciously and
independently, but it is always in pursuance of the auto-suggestion
or belief of the medium that it is an extraneous and, therefore, an
independent power.

No one who has witnessed even the stage exhibitions of the phenomena
of hypnotism will doubt the substantial truth of this proposition. An
intelligent subject can be made to assume any number of characters,
diverse as the antipodes, and in each one he will imitate the original
in thought, word, and action with perfect fidelity, so far as he knows
the character, habits, and idiosyncrasies of the individual personated,
firmly believing himself to be the individual he represents. He may,
with the same facility, be transformed into an angel or a devil or an
animal; and he will never doubt the truth of the suggestion, or fail to
act the character suggested, so far as it is physically possible. These
facts are well known to all hypnotists, as well as to all who witness
the common stage exhibitions of the phenomena. Some stage hypnotists
have much difficulty in preventing their subjects from exhibiting
spiritistic phenomena on the platform. This was a common experience of
Professor Cadwell, an American performer, who was himself a spiritist.
When it became known to his audiences and subjects that the latter were
liable to be "controlled by spirits," the trouble became very marked,
and the professor was greatly annoyed by the frequency with which his
subjects were seized upon by "passing spirits," and made to receive
communications and perform other antics in the name of the spirits
of their dead acquaintances. The phenomena exhibited through these
subjects were identical with those shown through ordinary mediums,
and indeed some of his best subjects afterwards became successful
professional mediums. That the liability of the professor's subjects to
lapse into mediumship was the result of suggestion is shown by the fact
that Professor Carpenter, who was Cadwell's pupil, and operated by his
methods, and was in every sense his peer as an operator, never had any
trouble with mediumistic phenomena, for the simple reason that he was
careful to avoid suggesting the idea to his subjects that such a thing
was possible. In point of fact it is well known to many hypnotists
that all the phenomena of spiritism can be reproduced through their
subjects by simply suggesting to them that they are under the control
of spirits. Of course it may be said that the spirits do actually take
possession of a hypnotic subject when permitted to do so, and that it
is the genuine control of spirits after all. The answer to this is that
it is also just as easy to obtain communications from a living person
through a hypnotic subject as from a dead one, and from an imaginary
person as from a real one, by merely making the proper suggestion. The
same is true of any medium, for that matter, as will presently be shown.

It is obvious, therefore, that the universal law of suggestion operates
upon the subjective mind of a medium with the same force and certainty
as upon all others. He is in the subjective, or hypnotic, condition.
The suggestion that he is about to be controlled by the spirits of the
dead is ever present to his mind, and is all potent. It is a part of
his education. It is his religious belief. No other explanation of the
mysterious phenomena is known to him. He knows only that he is moved by
a power, an intelligence, over which he exerts no conscious control.
It gives utterance to thoughts beyond his comprehension, and possesses
knowledge of matters of which he consciously knows nothing. His
conclusion is, first that the intelligence is something extraneous to
his personality, and secondly that it must be that of an inhabitant of
another world. From his standpoint it is the only rational conclusion.
His hereditary belief in the immortality of the soul confirms it. His
reading of the Bible sanctions the belief in the power of spirits to
hold communion with the living. His hope of a life beyond the grave,
and his longing to hold communion with the loved and lost, combine to
give his conclusions a welcome reception in the chambers of his mind.

A more potent suggestion was never forced upon the subjective
mind of man than this; and in obedience to the universal law, it
must be believed by the medium's subjective mind, and acted upon
accordingly. And the subjective mind _does_ believe the suggestion
most implicitly. If it did not, the law of suggestion would have no
place in experimental psychology, and all the conclusions deducible
therefrom would have to be revised. So believing, it follows that,
when questioned, it will unhesitatingly affirm that it is the spirit
of whatever person is suggested; and so far as the medium knows the
character or antecedents of the spirit invoked, that spirit will
be personated with all the preternatural acumen characteristic of
subjective mental activity.

If the chain of reasoning by which the medium and his friends have
arrived at the conclusion that the phenomena must proceed from
disembodied spirits seems to them to be perfect, their conviction rises
to the dignity of a certainty, in their estimation, when the supposed
spirit begins to forward alleged communications from the hypothetical
border-land of another world. They find that his alleged "control" is
able to tell them secrets which they supposed to be safe in their own
custody, or perhaps only known to themselves and the deceased whose
spirit has been invoked. He will describe the character and personal
appearance of deceased persons whom it was impossible that he should
have known in life, sometimes even giving their names and ages; he will
tell of incidents in their career known only to the person for whose
benefit the communication is given.

If the sitter is sceptical, and has learned something of telepathy,
his ready objection is that all this is "mind-reading." But presently
the medium will describe some one of whom the sitter has not thought
for years, who was utterly unknown to the medium, and of whom he
never heard. It is then that the sitter is confounded. His telepathic
explanation is exploded, for he "was not thinking of the deceased at
all; it could not, therefore, be mind-reading," he declares, with all
the enthusiasm of a new convert whose last objection has been answered.

There is no more common or popular explanation of certain phases of
spiritistic phenomena than attributing them to mind-reading. When a
medium relates to you incidents of your life of which you know he
has no previous knowledge, the most obvious explanation is that he
reads your mind,--that is, if you do not believe that he is controlled
by spirits; and you are undoubtedly right. But when he tells you of
things that you had forgotten, and describes persons of whom you are
not thinking, you jump to the conclusion that thought-reading does not
explain that particular phenomenon. And it is just here that you make a
mistake, for the reason that you do not understand the first principles
of mind-reading. But when it is once understood that mind-reading
is the communion of two subjective minds, and that the objective or
conscious thoughts of the sitter have no necessary effect upon the
character of the communications, it will be seen that the fact that the
sitter was not consciously thinking of the person described, or had
forgotten the incident recalled, has no evidential value whatever. The
sitter may or may not be thinking consciously of the subject of the
communication; he may even be endeavoring to cause the medium to speak
of some particular one with whom he earnestly desires to communicate.
It makes no difference whatever, for it is the uppermost thought of
the subjective mind that is read, and of that the sitter has neither
knowledge nor conscious control. That the medium relates incidents of
the sitter's life which he had forgotten until reminded of them, is not
at all strange or unaccountable, when we remember that the memory of
the subjective mind is perfect. Neither is there any evidential value
in the fact that the sitter cannot remember an incident related by the
medium; for he must remember that objective memory retains little,
comparatively, of the incidents of life, while the subjective mind
retains all.

It will thus be seen that in order to explain the phenomena of
spiritism on the hypothesis that it has its origin wholly within the
sub-conscious mind of the medium, it is not necessary to presuppose
that he is dishonest or insincere when he attributes it to disembodied
spirits. In the absence of knowledge on his part of the recent
discoveries in psychological science, he has the best of reasons for
so believing, for up to the present time no other hypothesis has
been advanced which will account for all the phenomena on any other
rational supposition. But the two great laws--duality of mind and
suggestion--clear away the greatest stumbling-block in the way of
scientific investigation of this, the greatest problem of the ages.
It is now no longer necessary to deny the phenomena, since they can
all be accounted for on scientific principles, outside the domain of
the supernatural. It is no longer necessary to consider the spiritual
medium either a fool or an impostor, since the phenomena are genuine,
and their explanation on scientific principles is impossible, except in
the light of very recent discoveries in psychic science.

Having set forth the fundamental principles underlying the production
of so-called spirit phenomena, we will now proceed briefly to examine
their various phases and leading characteristics, and to show how the
hypothesis under consideration applies to each of them with the same
force and pertinency as in the case of the other psychic phenomena
which have been considered.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI.

THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Various Classes of Phenomena.--Clairvoyance.--Its Field not yet
    clearly defined.--Telepathy invades its Ancient Domain.--Simple
    Experiments in Telepathy.--Their Significance.--Telepathic Power
    in Mediums.--Telepathic Visions.--A Typical S�ance.--Wonderful
    Exhibition of Telepathic Power.--An Affecting Interview of
    the Sitter with Himself.--Deductions.--Visions of Inanimate
    Things as well as of Deceased Persons.--Spirit of the Jack of
    Clubs.--Subjective Memory.--Spirit Identity.--Allan Kardec's
    Observations.--His Illogical Conclusions.--His Supreme
    Test.--Telepathic Explanation.--Four Ways of explaining his Test
    Case.


There are several ways by which the operations of the subjective mind
can be brought above the threshold of consciousness. When this is done
by any one of the various methods, a phenomenon is produced. Each of
these phenomena has been, at some time in the history of mankind,
attributed to the agency of disembodied spirits.

The leading phenomena above alluded to are clairvoyance, clairaudience,
telepathy, mesmerism, or hypnotism, automatic writing, percussive
sounds (spirit-rapping), movement of ponderable bodies (table-tipping),
and phantasmic appearances.

Of these, clairvoyance, telepathy, and hypnotism have generally ceased
to be regarded as proceeding from supernatural agencies. They are now
recognized as powers inherent in mankind, and, as will be seen, are
largely employed to explain other phenomena.

Of clairvoyance little will be said, for the reason that it is still
an open question among scientists who have been, and are still,
investigating the subject, whether independent clairvoyance exists as
a power of the human mind. Sufficient evidence has not been brought to
my attention to demonstrate its existence. Certainly the great bulk of
phenomena which are popularly regarded as evincing clairvoyant power
must now be referred to telepathy. It must be said, however, that many
phenomena have been produced which cannot at present be accounted
for on any other hypothesis than that of independent clairvoyance.
Yet it is not impossible that, when the laws of telepathy are better
understood, all so-called clairvoyant phenomena may be referred to that
agency. For the purposes of our argument, however, it is not specially
important that the distinction should be clearly drawn between the two,
inasmuch as telepathy, which is an undoubted power of the subjective
mind, sufficiently explains all the so-called spiritistic phenomena
involving the perception by the medium of facts not within his own
experience or his previous knowledge. I will therefore first treat
of those phenomena the mysteries of which are directly and primarily
referable to telepathy.

A very simple experiment will enable almost any one to demonstrate
telepathic power. Let a person be securely blindfolded, by taking a
pair of kid gloves, folding them into pads, placing them over his eyes,
and binding them on by means of a handkerchief. Then let a circle
be formed by a few persons, with their hands joined, the percipient
forming one of the circle. Let a card be selected at random from a
pack, taking care that no one sees any other card of the pack, even for
an instant, until the experiment is over. Then place the card in plain
sight of all but the percipient, and let them fix their minds and gaze
upon the card, and in silence await the result. In the mean time the
percipient should be and remain in a perfectly passive and tranquil
frame of mind, and simply watch for visions. He will soon begin to see
indistinct objects floating in the darkness, and these objects will
presently begin to form themselves into shapes more distinct. They may
be evanescent, and disappear at intervals; but they will soon return
in still more definite form, and will eventually assume some shape
that will suggest the card selected. It may be that a vision of the
whole card will be presented, exactly as it is, or it may be that there
will be a sort of allegorical representation of it. For instance, in
an experiment tried in presence of the author the ten of diamonds had
been selected. Instead of seeing a vision of the card, there was an
appearance of ten real diamonds, arranged in rows corresponding to the
rows of spots on the card, each one sending forth rays of light and
scintillations of color. As it was the first experiment the percipient
had ever tried, he was at a loss to know the meaning, if it had any,
of the vision; but as it persisted in coming, he finally ventured
to remark, hesitatingly, that he had an "impression of the ten of
diamonds." The applause which followed told him that his subjective
mind had conveyed to his consciousness by means of an allegorical
vision the information it had telepathically received. It may here be
remarked parenthetically that the subjective mind of man appears to be
fond of allegory as a means of conveying its thoughts or information
above the threshold of consciousness. The history of mankind is full of
illustrations of this fact.

When the next card was selected, the percipient saw the vision of a
single heart spot floating in the darkness, unattached to anything like
a card; whereupon he ventured to name the ace of hearts, which was
correct. In all, five cards were selected at this sitting, and each one
was named correctly, with the exception of the last, which was the five
of spades. The five of clubs was named; but the percipient explained
his mistake by saying that one-half of each spot was concealed from
his view, namely, the points of the spade spots, which appeared to be
thrust into the darkness, so to speak, leaving only the handle end of
the spades exposed to view. As that half of the spade spot corresponds
exactly to the corresponding half of a club spot, the mistake was
natural, and was really of as great, if not greater, evidential value
than if the card had been correctly named.

Others of the company tried the same experiment, generally without
physical contact with any one else, and each one was able to name some
of the cards correctly. But no one was able to name correctly a card
which was not seen by some one else,--which showed clearly that the
power to see the card resulted from telepathy, and not from independent
clairvoyance. It should be here stated that there were six in the
company, each one of whom tried the experiment, and each scored a
sufficient number of successes to remove the result from the domain of
coincidence.

These experiments were as simple as could well be devised, and to the
unreflecting mind may seem trifling. But I shall endeavor to show that
they possess unmeasured significance.

Before proceeding to do so, it may be well to state that visions
resulting from telepathic communion are as varied as is the character
of the communicants or the subjects of the messages. They are often
seen by the percipient as plainly as the objective reality could be
seen; and events are depicted by means of visions that re-enact the
scenes, with all the characters and actors represented, as perfectly as
the reality itself.[35]

It now remains to show how this faculty of reading the minds of others
is unconsciously employed by spirit mediums to impart to their clients
information regarding persons and events of which the medium has no
previous knowledge.

We will consider, for this purpose, the case of a medium who develops
no physical phenomena, but who simply receives his visitor, tells
him of the events of his past life, describes his spirit-friends,
conveys oral communications from them, and occasionally drops into
prophecy. The visitor may or may not be a professed believer in
spiritism; but the fact that he is there to consult a medium shows a
faith sufficient for the purpose in view, and propinquity places his
subjective mind _en rapport_ with that of the medium. We will suppose
that this is the first time that the two have met, and that the medium
is entirely unacquainted with the character, the antecedents, or the
deceased friends of the sitter. The first thing that the medium does
is to become wholly or partially self-hypnotized. He may go into the
state only partially, and appear to the visitor to be in his normal
condition. He may, and probably does, believe that his "control" takes
possession of his body and talks through him; he has, as we have
already seen, every reason for this belief. He is taken possession
of by some unseen force, is guided by some unseen intelligence which
possesses powers and attributes of which he is not conscious in his
normal condition. He has no other hypothesis to account for the
extraordinary manifestations of which that intelligence is the source.
To make assurance doubly sure, the intelligence tells him that it is
the spirit of some deceased person, and gives him a detailed and very
plausible account of itself. He is forced to believe the statements of
his subjective entity, for he knows no reason for believing otherwise,
and it, in turn, is compelled by the laws of its being to believe
itself to be what it represents; for the suggestion has been made to
it that it is the spirit of a deceased person. That suggestion having
been made in a general way, to begin with, his subjective mind will
proceed to fill in the details in some way with marvellous acumen, and
with such logical circumstantiality of detail as to deceive "the very
elect." It is just as it is in the case of a hypnotized person, who, in
pursuance of a post-hypnotic suggestion, having done some absurd act,
when questioned as to why he did it, will, on the instant, invent some
reason so plausible that the act will seem perfectly natural to one who
does not know its origin.

Again, the subjective mind of the sitter is also controlled by a
suggestion, more or less strong, that spirits of the dead are about
to be invoked; and it is also ready with its logical deductions from
the premises suggested, and will perform its part in the s�ance with
the same alacrity and acumen. Here, then, we have two subjective minds
_en rapport_, and the telepathic conditions for a successful s�ance
are established. The shrewd and successful medium usually begins by
making some very complimentary remarks concerning the character and
mental attributes of the sitter. This puts the latter at his ease,
and gives him an exalted opinion of the good sense and judgment of
the medium. Some incidents of the sitter's life may then be related,
and his occupation indicated. It will generally be done in terms such
as indicate the fact that the medium obtains his impressions by means
of visions. For instance, the writer once heard a medium in New York
city describe the occupation of an examiner in the United States
Patent Office. The two had never met before, and did not know of each
other's existence ten minutes before the s�ance. Even the name of the
sitter had been withheld from the medium, for the purpose of testing
her telepathic powers, and for the further purpose of convincing one
of those present that spirits of the dead had nothing to do with the
manifestations. The members of the party introduced each other by
fictitious names, and talked spiritism to the medium until "harmonious
conditions" were established, when the s�ance began. "I see an immense
building," she began, "with a great number of rooms in it. In one of
these rooms I see you, seated at a large desk, with a great many papers
upon it. I see drawings, apparently of machinery, spread out upon the
desk before you. It seems to me that you must have something to do
with patent rights." She was informed that her conjecture was thus far
correct. It should here be remembered that a medium should always be
encouraged by a frank acknowledgment when he is correct. It encourages
him, puts him at his ease, and constitutes a suggestion that he is able
to perceive the truth in reference to that particular person; and,
consequently, helps him to proceed correctly with other manifestations.

"But," continued the lady, "this is not your only occupation. I see
you in your library at home, surrounded by books and manuscripts. You
appear to be writing a book."

She then went on to describe correctly all the bookcases and other
furniture in the room, and then said,--

"I see the pathway by which you have arrived at your present conclusion
in reference to the subject of your book. It is all strewn with
rubbish and weeds, all of which you have thrown aside. But you see a
great light ahead, and are pursuing that with perfect confidence and
steadiness of purpose."

"Am I in the right path?" inquired the examiner.

"I cannot tell, for I cannot perceive the subject on which you are
writing. I think you are, however, for the light ahead seems so clear."

After a pause she added,--

"You are making one mistake. You think that you are doing it all
yourself. But you are not. You are constantly guided by a great spirit."

"Who is he?" was asked, with all the greater interest because the
gentleman _was_ writing a book, and, like every other author, felt that
he had perceived "a great light;" moreover, if he was sure of anything
connected with it, he was sure that he was doing it himself, without
the aid of any spirit or spirits. "Give me the name of my spirit friend
and guide," he added.

"I cannot do that to-day," she replied, with the true commercial
instinct of the professional medium; "come to-morrow, and I will try to
give you the name."

Accordingly, the same party visited her the next day, when she made
every effort to obtain the name, but without success. It should be
stated here that the lady was a slate-writing medium. Communication
after communication was written, but without signature, and all efforts
to obtain the name were futile. Finally the gentleman said, in an aside
apparently not intended for the ears of the medium, "I think I know who
it is. It must be either A B [naming a living friend in Washington],
or my brother, C D [giving his own name]," for he had no brother,
living or dead. Immediately a communication was written out, signed
by the supposed spirit brother, announcing the fact that he, and he
alone, was the inspiring power in charge of the literary work named,
that he was the "guardian spirit" of the gentleman, over whom he was
"constantly watching," etc.

The emotions created by the affecting terms of the communication can be
imagined when it is stated that all present, save the medium, knew that
the name was that of the sitter, and that he never had a brother. But
these emotions quickly gave place to wonder and admiration when it was
discovered that the signature was an almost exact reproduction of his
own, with all its salient peculiarities faithfully reproduced.

Comment upon this wonderful admixture of genuine telepathic power
and conscious or unconscious fraud will not be indulged in, save to
remark that the first day's proceedings exhibited marvellous telepathic
power under the most perfect test conditions. As to the second day's
performance, it need only be said that if the communication had
been from a genuine spirit, struggling in vain to remember his own
name, it shows that even spirits are controlled by the subtle power
of suggestion; for he had no hesitation in assuming the name of the
sitter when that name was suggested, and he so completely identified
himself with that person as to reproduce his signature with marvellous
accuracy. It may be said that a fraud was perpetrated upon the medium.
To this the plea of guilty must be entered, together with a plea of
extenuating circumstances, in that it was done in pursuit of scientific
truth. Whether the interests of truth were subserved, the reader must
judge for himself. To that end he must ask himself the question whether
it is not more probable that this manifestation was of the subjective
entity of the medium rather than of an independent, disembodied
spirit. Conceding the inherent power in mankind to convey and receive
telepathic communications, it must be evident that telepathy is a
sufficient explanation of what occurred the first day. It is true that
the medium thought that the information thus obtained was conveyed to
her by disembodied spirits. But that does not change the facts; and
when a phenomenon is explicable by reference to known natural laws,
we have neither occasion nor logical right to seek an explanation in
the realm of the supernatural. The second day's performance is as
easily explicable under the well-known laws of hypnotism. The medium
was in a partially hypnotic state, her subjective mind was active
and in control of her physical powers, and was necessarily perfectly
amenable to control by suggestion from any source. In obedience to the
law of auto-suggestion, it believed itself to be a disembodied spirit.
It acted in that capacity far enough to write communications of the
standard, indefinite character common to such productions, but could
give no name, for the simple reason that there was no name to give, and
none had been suggested. But the instant a name was suggested it seized
upon it, and, in pursuance of the suggestion that it represented the
sitter's brother, wrote just such a communication as the logic of the
situation dictated, believing, without a doubt, that it was actually
the spirit of the deceased brother of the sitter. It may be asked why,
if the medium was possessed of such wonderful telepathic power, did
she not perceive the fact that she was being imposed upon, that the
sitter was not sincere in his professions of a belief in spiritism,
and that he had not a brother in the spirit-land. Simply because
she was controlled by the universal law of suggestion, and the oral
suggestions had been made that he was a believer, and that he had a
brother deceased. If she had disbelieved the statement, it would have
constituted an exception to the operation of a natural and universal
law,--a suspension, in fact, of the laws of nature.

On the other hand, if we are to discard the foregoing explanation and
hold that it was actually a disembodied spirit controlling the medium,
we must presuppose a spirit without a name, or without sufficient
intelligence to remember his name. Either supposition, if it does
no violence to common-sense, is contrary to all the teachings of
spiritists, who have led us to believe that the law of spirit-life
is that of eternal progress; that all truth stands revealed to the
perception of the disembodied soul. It would cause one to lose
confidence in his guardian angels if he were forced to believe that a
short residence in the spirit-land could reduce the immortal mind to
such a state of imbecility.

This digression is indulged in for the purpose of illustrating the fact
that one of the means by which telepathic impressions are conveyed from
one to another is by visions. The percipient sees a vision representing
the incident sought to be communicated by the agent. He sees the image
of the object or person which the agent desires him to see. Thus, when
a person consults a medium he generally expects and desires to learn
something of his deceased friends. The medium goes into the subjective
condition for that purpose. The visitor's mind is full of anticipation
and hope that he will be put into direct communication with the loved
and lost. Presently the medium sees a vision of some person. He
believes that he sees a spirit. He describes it, and it is found to
correspond with one of the visitor's deceased friends. The visitor
recognizes the description, and says so. He asks for the name, and it
is given. Then the medium sees a vision representing some incident
known only to the visitor and the deceased. He describes the incident,
not, perhaps, as a vision which he sees, but as a statement of fact
imparted to him by the spirit. The visitor very likely knows that the
medium knew nothing of him or of the deceased before that hour. He is
convinced that the medium has seen and conversed with the spirit of
his dead friend, and he is a convert to spiritism from that moment.
Now, has the medium actually seen a spirit, or has he merely read the
sitter's subjective mind? Is there any more reason for supposing that
he has seen a spirit of a dead man than there is for supposing that a
mind-reader sees the spirit of the Jack of clubs when the image of that
card is telepathed to him? Obviously not. The conditions are precisely
the same in both cases. The percipient sees the image of that which is
in the mind of the agent. In the one case, it is a card; in the other
it is an individual. If it is the spirit of the individual that is
seen in the one case, it is the spirit of the card that is seen in the
other. In the case of the New York medium, did she see the spirit of
the Patent Office, the spirits of the papers, the drawings, the desks,
and the spirit of the examiner seated at the spirit of one of the
desks, examining the spirits of the drawings and of the specifications?

I repeat it, the percipient sees the image of that which is in
the mind of the agent, and he never sees more than that. It often
happens that the image of some one is seen, of whom the agent is not
consciously thinking at the moment. This has been already explained,
on the obvious ground that it is the subjective, or unconscious, mind
of the agent that is read. It sometimes happens that some fact is
related, some scene described, which the sitter cannot recall to mind,
and he conscientiously declares that he never knew the fact related,
nor witnessed the incident depicted. But when it is remembered that
the subjective mind of man retains all that he has ever seen, heard,
or read, and that he retains comparatively little in his objective
recollection, it is extremely unsafe for him to declare that any one
fact has never been known to him. It is merely negative evidence
at best, and amounts only to a declaration that he does not recall
the fact. When we consider how little we retain, in our objective
recollection, of what we have seen, heard, or read, we may well wonder
that it does not oftener happen that so-called spirits tell us of
circumstances which we do not remember. On the whole, it may be safely
assumed that no medium has ever yet been able to impart any information
that is not known either to the medium or to some living person with
whom he is _en rapport_. There is certainly nothing but the merest
negative evidence, such as has been described, that such a thing ever
happened. On the other hand, there is the strongest possible evidence
to the contrary, in the fact that there is room for a doubt on that
question. It is self-evident that if facts, known neither to the
medium nor those surrounding him,--that is, facts not known to him nor
obtainable by means of telepathy,--can be perceived or obtained by him
from independent sources, the evidence of that fact would be thrust
upon us from ten thousand different sources every hour. This is also
negative evidence, it is true, but it is all but conclusive. Thus, the
question of spirit identity has given spiritists no end of trouble.
Their ablest writers have sought in vain for a solution of the question
why it is that spirits constantly fail to give conclusive evidence of
their identity by means which could not be referred to the knowledge of
the medium or to telepathy.

On this subject Allan Kardec, one of the ablest writers on the subject,
discourses as follows:--

    "The identity of contemporaneous spirits is much more easily
    proved,--those whose character and habits are known; for it is
    precisely these habits, which they have not yet had time to throw
    aside, by which they can be recognized."[36]

This may be true; but it is also true that where the "character and
habits" of a supposed spirit are known to the medium, or to those who
are in telepathic rapport with him, simulation of that character and
those habits is perfectly easy to the expert medium. The more generally
the character and habits are known, the less evidential value is to be
attached to their reproduction.

Our author then proceeds:--

    "Without doubt the spirit can give the proofs if asked, but he does
    not always do so, unless it is agreeable to him, and generally
    the asking wounds him; for this reason it should be avoided. In
    leaving his body the spirit has not laid aside his susceptibility;
    he is wounded by any question tending to put him to the proof.
    _It is such questions as one would not dare to propose to him,
    were he living_, for fear of overstepping the bounds of propriety;
    why, then, should there be less regard after his death? Should a
    man enter a drawing-room and decline to give his name, should
    we insist, at all hazards, that he should prove his identity by
    exhibiting his titles, under the pretext that there are impostors?
    Would he not, assuredly, have the right to remind his interrogator
    of the rules of good breeding? This is what the spirits do, either
    by not replying or by withdrawing. Let us make a comparison.
    Suppose the astronomer Arago during his life had presented himself
    in a house where no one knew him, and he had been thus addressed;
    'You say you are Arago; but as we do not know you, please prove it
    by answering our questions; solve this astronomical problem; tell
    us your name, your Christian name, those of your children, what you
    did such and such a day, at such an hour, etc.' What would he have
    answered? Well, as a spirit he will do just what he would have done
    during his lifetime; and other spirits do the same."

The above is considered the best reason that can be given for
the fact that spirits whose character and habits in life are not
generally known, or not known to the medium or to those surrounding
him, invariably refuse to give proofs of their identity. But is his
comparison pertinent? I think not. It might be considered impertinent,
nay, the very height of ill-breeding, if one should insist on proofs
of identity when a stranger is casually introduced, or introduces
himself, in a drawing-room. But let us make another comparison.
Suppose a stranger--we, too, will say Arago the astronomer--calls
us up by telephone, and makes a statement of the most transcendent
interest and importance to us,--a statement which, if true, will change
the whole course of our lives and our habits of thought. He states
that his special mission is to make this portentous announcement to
us, and that his name is Arago, the astronomer. We know Arago the
astronomer by reputation, but have never had the honor of his personal
acquaintance. We know enough of him, however, to be certain that he
would tell us the exact truth as he understood it; and we would stake
our dearest interests upon a statement of his regarding that about
which he professed to have positive personal knowledge. Under such
circumstances would it be likely to wound his feelings or shock his
sense of propriety if we should reply through the telephone something
like this:--

"Sir, your message is of portentous import to us, and we cannot
hesitate to believe it if we can be assured that you are Arago the
astronomer, as you represent. We can hear you, but we cannot see you,
and you are not vouched for by any one we know. Please give us some
proof of your identity."

Would Arago the astronomer, or any other sensible man, wrap himself in
the mantle of offended dignity and treat us with silent contempt, or
remind us of "the rules of good-breeding"? Certainly not, especially if
the object of his existence was to make the communication, not only for
our individual benefit, but for the purpose of giving to all mankind
that direct and positive assurance, that tangible evidence, for which
all humanity has sought in vain since the dawn of creation.

Our author then continues:--

    "While spirits refuse to answer puerile and impertinent questions
    which a person would have hesitated to ask during their lives,
    they often spontaneously give irrefutable proofs of their
    identity by their character, revealed in their language, by
    the use of words that were familiar to them, by citing certain
    facts,--particularities of their life sometimes unknown to the
    assistants, and whose truth has been verified. Proofs of identity
    will spring up in many unforeseen ways, which do not present
    themselves at first sight, but in the course of conversations.
    It is better, then, to wait for them, without calling for them,
    observing with care all that may flow from the nature of the
    communications. (See the fact given, No. 70.)"

Turning now to page 82 of the volume, we find the statement above
alluded to, and it reads as follows:--

    "On a vessel of the Imperial French navy, stationed in the Chinese
    seas, the whole crew, from the sailors up to the staff-major, were
    occupied in making tables talk. They hit upon the idea of invoking
    the spirit of a lieutenant of this same vessel, some two years
    dead. He came, and after various communications, which astonished
    every one, he said, by rapping, what follows: 'I pray you instantly
    to pay the captain the sum of (he mentioned the sum), which I owe
    him, and which I regret not having been able to repay before my
    death.' No one knew the fact; the captain himself had forgotten the
    debt,--a very small one; but on looking over his accounts, he found
    there the lieutenant's debt, the sum indicated being perfectly
    correct. We ask, of whose thought could this be the reflection?"

Here, then, we find the supreme test applied,--the best conditions
possible, as prescribed by one of the ablest and most thoughtful
writers on the subject. It will be observed that he is not blind to the
possibilities of telepathy, and counts it as a factor in the case. "Of
whose thought could this be the reflection?" he asks triumphantly. "No
one knew the fact; the captain himself had forgotten the debt." It must
be admitted that if this test is conclusive, their case has been proved
a thousand times over. But in view of what is now known of the laws
of telepathy, it is self-evident that it proves nothing. Telepathy,
as we have again and again repeated, is the communion of two or more
subjective minds. It is not that of which we are consciously thinking
that the subjective mind of the medium perceives. Doubtless the captain
had forgotten, objectively, all about the loan. It was a very small
amount, and the lieutenant had been dead two years. But the subjective
mind of the captain, which remembers all things, great and small, could
not forget it, and it was telepathed to the subjective mind of the
medium. Besides, there was another very potent agency at work to bring
this loan into prominence. We have already seen, in former chapters,
that the normal function of the subjective mind is to watch over and
protect the life of the individual. It is the strongest instinct of
all animate nature. The protection of the material interests of the
individual is as much a part of the function of the subjective mind as
the protection of his life. Indeed, the promotion of the one is but a
means to secure the other. It was, therefore, simple obedience to the
first law of nature that prompted the subjective mind of the captain to
thrust this loan upon the attention of those present and thus secure
its payment.

It may be said, however, that there was no evidence that the captain
was present at the s�ance; and it may be assumed by some that
telepathic communion with his mind was impossible in his absence
from the circle. The former supposition is possibly correct, but the
latter is not probable, in view of the well-known facts of telepathy.
But assuming both to be true,--that the captain was absent from the
immediate circle, and that the circumstance would prevent telepathic
communion with his mind,--there still remain two or three other ways
of accounting for the phenomenon. In the first place, it is extremely
probable that the captain's accounts were kept by a subordinate, who
was present, and who, subjectively at least, remembered the account.
It is distinctly stated that all the subordinates were present, "from
the sailors up to the staff-major." This would necessarily include the
one whose duty it was to keep the books. His subjective mind would be
just as available as that of the captain for the production of what, in
those days, was considered a test case. Again, supposing that the entry
of the account was made by the captain's hand, it is extremely probable
that some one else had access to the books; and however superficially
the knowledge was impressed upon his consciousness, it was forever
fixed upon the tablets of his subjective memory, and was instantly
available for use when a test case was needed. To those who regard
independent clairvoyance as an established principle, or faculty,
of the human mind, the explanation is easy; for there would be no
difficulty in supposing the mind of the independent clairvoyant to be
capable of taking cognizance of all that was to be found in the ship's
records.

It is extremely improbable, however, that any third party figured in
the transaction, or that it is necessary to assume that any third party
knew of the loan. It is sufficient to know that the captain was aboard
the ship, and that everyone on the vessel was necessarily _en rapport_
with him. Besides, if any one in the circle was in telepathic rapport
with the captain, it would be an all-sufficient explanation of the
phenomenon; for it is well known that specific information, not known
to any one in the circle, can be obtained from some one having the
knowledge who happens to be _en rapport_ with any person in the circle.

Thus it will be seen that there are at least four ways of accounting
for the phenomenon, on well-established principles, without the
necessity of resorting to the assumption of supernatural agencies.

The subtle _r�le_ which telepathy plays in so-called spirit
manifestations must now be apparent. It is not only in the class
of phenomena to which we have alluded that its power is manifest,
but it reappears in all classes and phases of phenomena popularly
attributed to spirits. The greater part of the mystery which surrounds
these manifestations, aside from the purely physical phenomena, is
directly traceable to telepathy; and it explains that which, without
its aid, would be inexplicable on any other hypothesis than that the
manifestations proceed from disembodied spirits.

In concluding the discussion of this branch of the subject, I desire
distinctly to impress upon the mind of the reader an important
proposition which seems to have been lost sight of by many who are
otherwise inclined to give full credit to telepathy as a means of
explaining many so-called spirit phenomena. It is this:--

_It is not necessary that any member of a circle should be in
possession of objective knowledge of a fact in order to be able to
communicate it telepathically to the medium._

The reason will be obvious, after a moment's reflection, to any one
who admits the existence of the power of telepathy. If the power is
possessed by A to communicate a telepathic message to B, it follows
that B can communicate the same message to C, and C can convey it to
D, and so on, _ad infinitum_. This proposition will not be gainsaid by
any one who admits that A can convey a telepathic message to B. D may
have no objective knowledge of A or of B, but is _en rapport_ with C.
Now, we will suppose that a disaster happens to A. He is missing; he
is drowned; but no one possesses any objective knowledge of the fact,
and his friends institute a vain search, no one having the remotest
idea of what has happened to him. B, his mother, receives a telepathic
message, conveyed by A at the moment of his death to her subjective
mind, informing her of the sad accident. But not being sensitive to
subjective impressions, it is impossible for her subjective mind to
convey the message above the threshold of her consciousness. She is,
therefore, objectively ignorant of the fact, although her subjective
mind is fully cognizant of all its sad details. In the mean time, C, a
sympathetic neighbor, _en rapport_ with B, subjectively perceives that
which is so strongly impressed upon the subjective mind of the mother.
C is also unable to elevate the knowledge above the threshold of her
consciousness; but she is a believer in spiritism, and volunteers
to visit a neighboring city and consult a medium. She does so; and
the moment she becomes _en rapport_ with the medium, the telepathic
message is delivered, and the medium perceives, objectively as well as
subjectively, the details of the disaster which befell A. He describes
the whole transaction, and locates the exact spot where the body may
be found. Subsequent investigation demonstrates the exact knowledge
possessed by the medium, for the whole environment is found to be
exactly as described, and the body is found in the very spot indicated.

Now, the spiritists say that this occurrence cannot be explained by
reference to telepathy, for the reason that D was not _en rapport_
with A, nor with B. Nor was C _en rapport_ with A, for the latter was
dead before C could have become cognizant of the facts. The obvious
answer to this is, as before indicated, that if the power exists in
man to convey a telepathic message to his fellow-man, it presupposes
the existence of the power in the percipient to repeat the message to
a third person, and so on indefinitely, until some one receives it who
has the power to elevate the information above the threshold of his
consciousness, and thus convey it to the objective intelligence of the
world. Nor is the element of time necessarily an adverse factor in the
case; for there is no reason to suppose that such messages may not be
transmitted from one to another for generations. Thus, the particulars
of a tragedy might be revealed many years after the event, and in such
a way as to render it difficult, if not impossible, to trace the line
through which the intelligence was transmitted. For the spiritist the
easy and ever-ready explanation of such a phenomenon is to ascribe it
to the intervention of spirits of the dead. But to those who have kept
pace with the developments of modern scientific investigation, and who
are able to draw the legitimate and necessary conclusions from the
facts discovered, the explanation is obvious, without the necessity of
entering the domain of the supernatural.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 35: See "Phantasms of the Living," and the Proceedings of the
London Society for Psychical Research, for full confirmation of this
statement.]

[Footnote 36: Book on Mediums, pp. 331-2.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVII.

THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Psychometry.--"The Souls of Things."--Professor Denton's
    Experiments.--Wonderful Visions of the Ancient Environment
    of Geological Specimens.--A Piece of Mortar from
    Cicero's House.--Supposed Scientific Tests.--Explanation
    on Telepathic Principles.--Experiments in Hypnotism
    compared.--Clairvoyance and Telepathy.--Their Boundary
    Lines in Transit.--Clairaudience.--Definitions of the
    Term.--Socrates and his D�mon.--Modern Instances.--Mental
    Impressions.--Premonitions.--Their Unreliability.--Remarkable
    Examples of Clairaudience.--A Lawyer's Experience.--Subject to the
    Law of Suggestion.--Insanity sometimes results from Ignorance of
    the Cause.--Practical Suggestions.


There is another class of phenomena which has attracted a great deal
of public attention, and which demands a passing notice in this
connection. It is that class which has received an exhaustive treatment
in the work of the late Professor Denton, entitled "The Souls of
Things." It has been denominated "psychometry," which may be defined
as the supposed power of the human mind to discern the history of
inanimate objects by clairvoyance. Many wonderful stories are related
of the exercise of this supposed faculty, under the strictest test
conditions, as test conditions were then understood. Professor Denton
made a long series of experiments with his sister, his wife, and some
others who were supposed to possess that power in a remarkable degree.
The powers of his wife and sister were indeed wonderful; but, as we
shall see, not in the line in which the experiments were directed.
It must be premised that the professor was a very learned man, not
only in his specialty, which was geology, but in all branches of human
knowledge. His wife and sister were also highly cultivated women, and
were specially interested in those branches of learning in which the
gifted professor excelled. Thus the conditions were extremely favorable
for the production of extraordinary results in whatever branch of
occult science they might jointly engage.

It was the habit of the professor to select some geological specimen,
or a fragment of some historical structure, and submit it to his
percipient for her version of its history. She would readily enter a
partially subjective condition, place the relic on her head, and at
once give a very plausible, and oftentimes a most wonderfully accurate,
history of the scenes which had been enacted within its former
environment. Thus, if the object happened to be a geological specimen,
she would launch out into a glowing description of its surroundings
when found, and going back into its history before the earth's crust
was formed, trace it down through the different geological changes
until she landed it in the professor's cabinet. Again, a piece of
mortar from the dwelling of Cicero would be handed to her, and she
would give a vivid description of the domestic life of those who had
occupied the mansion, and describe historic events which "might have
been seen" from the ancient habitat of the piece of mortar. It is
easy to see how all this might be accomplished, and all the known
facts stated with accuracy, regarding the geological environment of
the piece of stone in her hands, when her own geological learning was
taken into consideration. But the professor was not unmindful of so
obvious an explanation of her power. To eliminate that element was his
first care. To that end he would wrap the specimen in a piece of paper,
and carefully conceal its character from her objective knowledge. The
result was always the same. She would read the history of the specimen
with the same apparent accuracy as before. The professor, however, did
not forget the possibility that telepathy was an element necessary to
be eliminated. The possibility that she might read what was in his
own mind must, therefore, be provided against. To that end he wrapped
a large number of specimens in packages as nearly alike as possible,
and mixed them together so that it was impossible for him to know
them apart. One specimen after another would then be handed her, and
each one would be described with the same accuracy as before. This
was considered the supreme test, and the doctrine that "things," in
common with men, have "souls," was thought to be demonstrated. The
Orientalists would say that he had demonstrated that the history of
all things is "recorded in the astral light," whatever that may be.
The spiritist would say that the spirits of dead men had given her the
information.

The true explanation is obvious to those who are acquainted with the
facts of telepathy. The professor was an eminent geologist and a
classical scholar. In his subjective mind was the history of every
geological specimen in his possession, pictured clearly and vividly,
according to the theories of the best geologists of his generation. His
imagination carried him back to the time when chaos reigned supreme. He
followed the fragment of rock down through all the changes which took
place in the earth's structure, until it became a part of the solid
mass of rock from which it was taken. In the ever-changing environment
of that fragment, since the time when it was a part of a vast mass
of molten matter, there was material for pictures of the sublimest
scenes incident to the formation of a world. Those pictures, to the
imagination of every geologist worthy of the title, are ever present
and intensely vivid. A fragment of rock to him is an open book, in
which are recorded the history of the sublimest works of Omnipotence,
and his imagination supplies the panoramic illustrations. In
experiments such as have been described, these pictures are necessarily
presented to the subjective mind of the percipient in a form so clear
and vivid that she would be insensate indeed if she failed to describe
them in appropriate terms. And when we consider the fact that the
percipients employed in these experiments were exceptionally cultivated
women, especially interested in the subjects of the professor's
research, it will be seen that successful telepathic experiments were
to them exceptionally easy.

The successful reading of the history of the specimens submitted to
the percipients is therefore easily accounted for where the professor
had conscious knowledge of the contents of the packages. It remains
only to explain the reason of success when he sought to eliminate
that element by submitting a large number of similar packages, not
consciously knowing one from the other. This also is easy to understand
when the extraordinary acumen of the subjective mind is considered. It
is a common hypnotic experiment to draw a blank card from a package,
hand it to a subject, and suggest that it contains a picture of some
person. The card is then marked on the back and shuffled with fifty or
more others. A good subject will, in nine cases out of ten, indicate
the marked card as the one containing the suggested picture, and that
without the possibility of seeing the mark on the other side. It is
obviously a much easier feat to remember the differences in packages
than in blank cards. Of the former, no two could possibly be alike. Of
the latter, no two would ordinarily be sufficiently unlike to enable
one to determine the difference by the unaided senses. But to the
subjective mind the feat of remembering each package and its contents
would be very easy, compared with thousands of recorded instances to be
found in the literature of psychic phenomena.

It will be observed that we have refrained from invoking the aid of
clairvoyance to account for the phenomena of psychometry. It would
be a much simpler solution of the problem to assume that the power
of independent clairvoyance exists, and that the percipients simply
saw the contents of the packages. But inasmuch as the known facts of
telepathy afford a perfect solution, we are not logically justified
in entering a domain which is in the slightest degree overshadowed by
doubt. By this remark it is not meant to imply that there is any doubt
of the existence of a power which is generally known as clairvoyance,
but that its limitations are as yet undecided. That is to say, the
boundary line between clairvoyance and telepathy is not at present
clearly drawn. The field of clairvoyance is constantly narrowing its
boundaries. Thus, a few years ago every perception of a fact not
cognizable by the senses was attributed either to clairvoyance or to
spirits. Sceptics on the latter subject were wont to explain certain
phenomena by attributing them to the former. The phenomena which
could not thus be explained were relegated to the domain of fraud and
legerdemain. When the phenomena of telepathy became better understood,
the field of clairvoyance was greatly narrowed, as it was found that
most of the phenomena before explained by clairvoyance were really due
to telepathic communion. But the powers and limitations of telepathy
are not yet clearly marked; and it is found that every step in advance
in the knowledge of its principles by just so much narrows the field of
clairvoyance. No better illustration of this fact could be given than
the phenomena of psychometry, which we have just been considering. The
power to read the history of a geological specimen with a plausible
show of accuracy was first attributed to clairvoyance. As telepathic
powers began to be understood, it was thought that possibly the
percipient simply related what was read in the mind of the agent. Many
experiments were made throughout the country which demonstrated that
fact, and the recognized field of clairvoyance was thereby curtailed.
But Professor Denton determined to eliminate the element of telepathy
by so disposing of his relics as to divest himself of all knowledge of
the particular one under examination. When the percipient exhibited the
same powers of discernment under those circumstances it was thought
that the element of telepathy was eliminated, and that the power of
clairvoyance was demonstrated. But as the knowledge of telepathy is
increased, and when it is understood that telepathy is the communion
of subjective minds, and that the subjective mind is endowed with
transcendent powers in certain directions, while it is hedged about
with limitations in others, it is seen that the professor did not
succeed, as he had supposed, in eliminating the element of telepathy.
Thus the field of clairvoyance is again curtailed, and that of
telepathy correspondingly enlarged. It may be assumed, therefore, that
the boundary lines between the two supposed powers are still unmarked.
In the mean time it is unsafe to assume any one point as the boundary,
or even to assume that there is, in fact, any line at all. Judgment
must be suspended until telepathy is better understood. All that can be
safely said is that there are facts which cannot as yet be explained
on any other hypothesis than that of independent clairvoyance. When
we come across such a fact we may provisionally assume the power to
exist, and await the slow progress of experimental knowledge to enable
us to classify the fact in accordance with its legitimate relations.
It is logically safe to do this as long as we thus avoid the necessity
of wholesale denials of demonstrated facts on the one hand, and on the
other refrain from entering the domain of the supernatural in search of
a hypothesis.

It is thought that enough has now been said to explain the part which
telepathy plays in the phenomena which have been considered, and also
to enable the intelligent reader to apply the principles to all other
classes of phenomena in which telepathy constitutes a possible factor.
It is constantly reappearing in every phase of psychic phenomena,
and constitutes a factor in every manifestation of intelligent power
involving the perception of that which is beyond the reach of the
senses.


CLAIRAUDIENCE.

The next subject in order is that of clairaudience, or "clear hearing."
It is a faculty of the human mind much more rarely developed than that
of clairvoyance,--that is, if we assume the latter to be identical with
telepathy, which we may do for the purposes of this discussion.

The Century Dictionary defines clairaudience as "the supposed power of
hearing in a mesmeric trance sounds which are not audible to the ear in
the natural waking condition."

This, as far as it goes, is a correct definition of that faculty; but
it defines a very small part of its field of operations, and that
part which is of the least importance. It may be defined, broadly, to
be "the power of hearing the spoken words of a human soul." In other
words, it is that faculty of man's intelligence which enables his
objective mind to receive communications from his own subjective mind
or from that of another by means of spoken words. It is one means of
bringing the operations of the subjective mind above the threshold
of consciousness. The power is by no means confined to persons in a
mesmeric trance, although it seems probable that one must be in a
partially subjective state to enable him to hear clairaudiently. The
degree of subjectivity may be very slight, so that the percipient may
seem to himself and others to be in a perfectly normal condition. The
sounds--if that may be called sound which does not cause atmospheric
vibrations--are perfectly distinct to the consciousness of the
percipient, but are not perceptible to others who may be near him and
in the normal condition.

Like all other means for bringing the operations of the subjective
mind above the threshold of consciousness, the sounds have from time
immemorial been attributed to supernatural agencies. Socrates furnished
the most notable example in ancient or modern times of a man whose
subjective mind was able at any time to communicate messages to his
objective mind by means of spoken words. It is well known that he
supposed himself to be constantly attended by a d�mon, or guardian
spirit, who watched over him and warned him of any danger that was
imminent. (See Chapter X. for a fuller discussion of Socrates and
his d�mon.) The biblical student will recall to mind many instances
where voices were heard, conveying intelligence of the most portentous
character, and a critical examination of some of the instances will
not fail to reveal their true nature.

Many spiritual mediums of the present day have the faculty largely
developed. Some of them are enabled to obtain the names of their
sitters by hearing them spoken clairaudiently, and the names of
supposed spirits are obtained in the same way. It is popularly
supposed that the ordinary method of telepathic communion, when the
message is not brought above the threshold of consciousness, is by
mental impressions. It is, of course, impossible for us to know the
processes employed in the ordinary communion of subjective minds. It
seems probable, however, that it is by means of such language as is
employed by the communicants in objective life. All that is or can
be known is, that when the ideas are communicated to the conscious
mind, it is necessarily by such means as can be understood,--that is,
by means which appeal to the senses. It is true that the subjective
mind is often able strongly to impress the objective mind, especially
when danger to the person is imminent, or when some near relative or
dear friend is in danger. Such impressions are known as premonitions.
Sometimes they are so strong as to be of real service in averting
danger. But they are not always reliable, for the reason that we
are seldom able to distinguish a real premonition from that feeling
arising from fear and anxiety regarding the welfare of those who are
absent and very dear to us. Thus, a mother will often feel that she
has a premonition of danger to an absent child, but will afterwards
learn that her fears were groundless. Perhaps at another time a real
premonition will be disregarded. It seems probable that when the laws
of subjective mental action are better understood, there may be some
method formulated by which a genuine premonition may be recognized. It
is certain that in all cases where danger to the person is imminent,
the subjective mind makes a supreme effort to give warning and avert
the danger. That being its normal function, its highest activity is
exercised in the effort to preserve the life of the individual. It
is sometimes successful, and sometimes not; but that the effort is
always made does not admit of doubt. Sometimes it succeeds by means
most extraordinary,--clairaudience not infrequently being the means
of receiving the warning. Thus, a lady once confessed to the writer
that she at one time, in a fit of despondency arising from ill health,
attempted to commit suicide. She had raised a pistol to her head and
was about to fire, when she heard an explosive sound, apparently in the
same room, resembling a pistol-shot. This caused her to pause for an
instant, when she heard the words, apparently spoken in her ear, "Not
now; you have two years yet!" Surprise caused her to lower the pistol,
and reflection caused her to desist, and finally to abandon the idea of
suicide. As the two years have not yet expired, it is too early to know
whether it is a case of prevision as well as of clairaudience.

One of the most remarkable cases of clairaudient warning against
danger that has ever come under the observation of the writer occurred
near Washington a short time ago. A well-known colored preacher was
aboard a train on its way to the city. He was dozing in his seat a few
miles out, when he was suddenly awakened by a cry of "Wreck! wreck!"
apparently sounding in his ears. He thought for a moment that he had
been dreaming; but after he was fully awake he again heard the same
words repeated three times. As he happened to be the only occupant
of the car, he knew that no one was playing a trick upon him, and he
instantly became panic-stricken, and rushed to the rear end of the car
and jumped off, although the train was going at the rate of thirty
miles an hour. He was somewhat cut and bruised, but managed to walk
to the next station, where he related his adventure to my informant.
Little importance was attached to the circumstance at that time, as his
train passed to the city in safety. But the very next train that passed
over the road in the same direction was wrecked by the falling of a
large rock upon it as it passed. The rock overhung the track, and had
evidently become loosened by the vibrations caused by passing trains.
Subsequent investigation by my informant revealed the fact that the
old preacher had leaped from the train but a short distance beyond the
scene of the wreck.

Now, it may be asked, how do we connect the clairaudient warning of the
old man with the wreck which did not occur to his train? It must be
admitted that the circumstances do not constitute an ideally perfect
case of a life saved by a clairaudient reception of warning; but it
must also be held that the case is of all the greater evidential
value for that very reason. It is easy to perceive how the old man's
subjective mind perceived the danger, when it is once admitted that
it possesses the power to see that which is not within the range of
objective vision. Ever alert for the safety of the individual, it
perceived the danger, no matter how. It saw the condition of the
overhanging rock, and believed that that train would loosen its
hold. In the mean time the old man was in that passive, somnolent
condition most favorable for the reception of subjective impressions or
communications. He happened also to be clairaudient, and therefore in
the best possible condition for the conveyance of subjective messages
above the threshold of consciousness. And the message was delivered in
the most effective way possible,--in the same way in which Socrates
was again and again warned of impending danger. That the catastrophe
did not happen to his train proves only that the intelligence which
gave the warning was finite, that its knowledge was circumscribed by
the limitations of human judgment, and that it did not proceed from
Omniscience.

It may be here remarked that this incident seems difficult to explain
on any other hypothesis than that of independent clairvoyance. To
explain it on the principle of telepathy would involve the necessity
of presupposing that some person or persons knew of the dangerous
situation of the rock, and that they were in telepathic rapport with
the percipient. Either supposition seems improbable, although not
impossible. Be this as it may be, the fact remains that the subjective
mind of man has some means of reaching out beyond the range of our
faculties of objective perception, and of knowing when and where danger
threatens the individual. That it is constantly on the alert for that
purpose, is also certain.

But its efforts are not directed exclusively to the protection of
the body from harm. It is also on the alert for the protection of
the material interests of the individual, and for the advancement of
whatever aims and objects he has in life. These objects are, of course,
subsidiary to the main one, being means to the end in view,--namely,
the preservation of human life. One of the most eminent lawyers in the
United States informs me confidentially that he is often guided, in
critical emergencies, by a voice which gives him in a single, concise
sentence the key to the situation. All the years of his adult life
this voice has warned him of impending danger, and guided him to the
attainment of the objects of his ambition. He did not, in early life,
entertain any well-defined theory on the subject of the origin of the
voice, but has always been guided by its monitions, and never to his
disadvantage. Of late years, however, he has become convinced of its
true source, and now regards his faculty as of the most transcendent
interest and scientific importance, to say nothing of its value as a
personal mentor.

It seems probable that the faculty might be cultivated to an unlimited
extent, provided its true source could be recognized early in life
and its monitions heeded. It is also probable that most people have
occasionally heard clairaudiently, though but few have paid attention
to the phenomenon; and those who have done so have either attributed it
to imagination, or regarded it as a subjective hallucination. In either
case the auto-suggestion would necessarily prevent the development of
the faculty. It sometimes happens, however, that spirit mediums develop
the faculty to a remarkable extent. As they attribute the phenomena to
extraneous sources, the suggestion necessarily results in corresponding
phenomena. It is needless to remark that the same law of suggestion
which prevails in the production of other phenomena governs the
character of clairaudient manifestations. Thus, if the suggestion is
entertained that the voice proceeds from a disembodied spirit, or from
the guardian angel of the percipient, the character suggested will be
assumed by the subjective entity, and future communications will be
conducted on that basis. It may thus be made to assume the character of
an angel or of a devil, just as the suggestion happens to be made. The
suggestion, in the present state of knowledge on the subject of psychic
phenomena, must depend altogether upon accident, or the education and
habits of thought of the individual.

Doubtless, many persons have been made insane by constantly hearing
what they supposed to be spirit voices. Not knowing the true origin
of the phenomenon, they endow it with whatever character happens to
suggest itself, and it readily assumes to be whatever is suggested; or
it may assume a dozen different characters, if the person happens to
imagine their existence. The effect can readily be conceived when one
is persuaded that he is beset by supernatural beings. Insane people
are often seen to be engaged in conversation with some imaginary
person, and when we say of such a soliloquist, "He is talking to
himself," we are wiser than we think; for that is the fact. But the
individual thought he was in conversation with supernatural beings. We
are accustomed to regard such conversations as symptoms of insanity,
whereas they are oftentimes the cause of insanity. The patient for some
reason develops the faculty of clairaudience. He imagines that the
voice proceeds from some extraneous source. His superstition causes
him to ascribe it to spirits. He constantly develops the faculty by
practice, until he becomes a monomaniac on the subject. His subjective
mind, dominated by an all-potent, but false, suggestion, gradually
obtains control of the objective faculties, and Reason abdicates her
throne. The man is insane, just as all men are insane who allow their
subjective minds to obtain the ascendency. This is, of course, an
extreme case; but it is less rare than many suppose. Our asylums are
full of men and women who, in one way or another, are dominated by
their subjective minds, acting in obedience to false suggestions which
have been dwelt upon so long that reason is powerless to combat them.

The lesson is obvious. We should learn first of all that the subjective
entity within each of us, whilst it is endowed with transcendent
powers, is also circumscribed by limitations which unfit it for
control of the dual man. Having learned this, it should be our care
to keep reason in the ascendency, and to control the subjective mind
by suggestions which, while keeping it in subordination, will direct
its powers in the channel of its legitimate functions,--namely, the
preservation and perpetuation of the human species.

Clairaudient powers, like every other power which enables man to
raise the operations of the subjective mind above the threshold of
consciousness, may to one who knows the laws which govern it, who
appreciates its powers, and who is aware of its limitations, become a
source of decided advantage. But to one who does not understand those
laws, powers, and limitations, those faculties may prove to be like the
wand in the hand of the slave of the magician in the Eastern tale. He
saw his master wave his wand, and heard him give orders to the spirits
who arose at his command. The slave stole the wand, waved it in the
air, and summoned the spirits. They came at his summons, but tore him
in pieces instead of obeying his commands. He had not observed that his
master used his left hand for the purpose of conjuration.

This tale was told for the purpose of illustrating the very point which
we have sought to make. The fate of the magician's slave was no worse
than that which may befall any man who irregularly summons his own
spirit, without understanding the laws which enable him to control it
and make it useful instead of destructive. He is conjuring with the
most potential force of nature below that of Omnipotence.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    The Planchette.--Modifications.--Easily operated.--Automatic
    Writing.--Governed by the Universal Law.--The Planchette without
    Spirits.--The Planchette and Telepathy.--Trance.--Ancient and
    Modern Superstitions relating to Trance.--Religious Systems founded
    on Trance.--Visions.--Swedenborg.--Oriental Philosophy.--Its
    Slow Growth and Stupendous Proportions.--Spiritistic
    Philosophy.--Its Evolution.--All founded on Trance Visions
    in Ignorance of the Law of Suggestion.--Cahagnet's Mesmeric
    Seers.--Their Revelations.--Objective and Subjective
    Visions.--Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy.--Visions of the Holy
    Virgin.--The Physical and Mental Attitude of Prayer.--The
    Prayer of Faith.--Obsession.--Possession.--Casting
    out Devils.--Devils out of Fashion.--The Influence of
    Suggestion.--The Element of Telepathy.--Dual Personality.--Loss of
    Identity.--Characteristics.--The Case of Ansel Bourne.--Possible
    Explanation.--A Proof of the Dual Hypothesis.--Multiple Personality.


Another method of bringing the operations of the subjective mind above
the threshold of consciousness is by means of an instrument called
the planchette. It consists of a thin board about six inches square,
resting upon two castors, the third leg consisting of a pencil, which
passes through a hole in the board, its point resting upon the paper
upon which the instrument is designed to write. The mode of operation
consists in resting the hand lightly upon the board and allowing it to
move over the paper without consciously aiding its progress. In the
hands of a medium it will soon begin to write, apparently propelled
by an unseen power. A modification of this apparatus is now on the
market, which consists of a similar piece of thin board, approximately
triangular in shape, with a plain wooden leg at each apex. Its feet,
like the feet of the gods, are "shod with wool." Accompanying it is a
board, say two feet square, on which the letters of the alphabet and
the arabic numerals are painted. Its mode of operation is similar to
that of the planchette, except that, instead of a pencil being used,
one of the legs serves as a pointer, and the words are spelled out,
letter by letter, as indicated by the pointer, which moves over the
board in the same mysterious way as the planchette. Its advantage over
the planchette consists in the fact that a greater number of persons
can operate it satisfactorily. Otherwise, the planchette is preferable,
inasmuch as it writes continuously, instead of spelling the words
letter by letter. In almost every family some one will be found who
can, with a little practice, obtain communications by this means from
his own subjective mind. This is the simplest way by which so-called
spirit communications can be obtained.

Automatic writing is a cognate method, and consists in holding a pencil
in the hand and letting it write. The subjective mind assumes control
of the muscles and nerves of the arm and hand, and propels the pencil,
the objective mind meantime being perfectly quiescent, and often
totally oblivious of what is being written. A smaller number of persons
can acquire this faculty than either of the others.

We assume, of course, that it is the subjective mind of the medium
that directs the pencil. The same laws govern the manifestations, and
the intelligence is hedged about by the same limitations. Suggestion
plays the same subtle _r�le_, and the knowledge of the subjects of the
communications are limited by that of the medium and those with whom
he is in telepathic rapport. The entity that guides the pencil almost
invariably assumes to be a spirit, and its communications necessarily
conform to the character assumed. The reason of this is obvious when
we consider the fact that automatic writing has always been associated
with the idea of spirit communion. The universality of this idea
constitutes an all-potent suggestion which cannot easily be overcome.
Even though the medium may profess to be a sceptic on the subject of
spirit intercourse, nevertheless he is dominated by that suggestion,
in the absence of any definite counter-suggestion. Obviously, a
counter-suggestion which could overcome the hypothesis of spirit
intercourse must be in the form of a theory which appeals more strongly
to the reason of the medium than the suggestion of spirit intercourse.
In the present state of popular opinion on the subject of spiritism it
would be difficult to find a medium whose subjective mind would not
be dominated by the popular hypothesis. Nevertheless, instances have
been known where the popular idea did not prevail. One case that is now
recalled is reported in the "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical
Research," April, 1891 (page 23). The medium, or, more properly
speaking, the automatist, was a young lady, aged fifteen. "She had not
previously heard of planchette," says the author, "and spiritualism
was to her a mere name." This was a very desirable condition of mind
for the purpose, and as rare as desirable. "She never knew what she
had written till it was looked at," continues the author, "and there
was often some slight difficulty in deciphering it. Thus, the first
question, 'Who are you that write?' produced what at first I took to
be mere scrawling, and C (the automatist) shortly after left the room.
After she had done so, I took another look at this scrawl, and then at
once perceived that it was legible, and that the name written in answer
to the question was 'Henry Morton.' I at once followed C upstairs, and
asked her if she had ever heard the name; and she replied that it was
that of a character in a Christmas play she had acted in, more than a
year previously."

This is a most remarkable case in more ways than one. It shows,
first, that when the automatist knows nothing of spiritism, and there
is consequently no suggestion of the spirits having any part in the
performance, the subjective mind will not assume that it is a spirit
that writes; secondly, that the bare fact that the question, "Who
are you that write?" is asked, amounts to a suggestion that some
third person is writing, and that the automatist is dominated by the
inference drawn, just the same as if the suggestion had been a positive
statement. The most remarkable part of it, however, is the persistency
with which her subjective mind clung to the suggestion that she was
"Henry Morton." She had assumed that character more than a year before,
in a Christmas play, and her subjective mind still identified itself
with the imaginary personage, and believed the truth of the suggestion
as firmly as it would have believed the suggestion that it was a
disembodied spirit, had that suggestion been made. The author shows
an intelligent appreciation of this fact when he adds: "Had the name
been, as it easily might have been, that of some deceased friend, it is
obvious what inference would have been drawn." It is also obvious that
it would have been that of some deceased person, had the young lady
been acquainted with the planchette and the spiritistic hypothesis.

Another instance of automatic writing where the spiritistic hypothesis
was ignored, is reported in the "Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research," vol. iii. pages 8-23. Space can be given to a
brief extract only. The experiments were tried by the Rev. P.H. Newnham
and his wife, the latter acting as the automatist. The primary object
of these experiments was to test the power of thought-transference.
This was very successfully done, as the answers, though not always
correct, referred to the questions. It appears, incidentally, that they
entertained a different hypothesis from the usual one, as will appear
from the answers which we quote. The questions were written down by Mr.
Newnham, and no hint was given to the operator as to their character or
subject. The following are fair samples:--

    "_Q._ Is it the operator's brain, or some external force, that
    moves the planchette? Answer 'brain,' or 'force.'

    _A._ Will.

    _Q._ Is it the will of a living person, or of an immaterial spirit
    distinct from that person? Answer 'person' or 'spirit.'

    _A._ Wife.

    _Q._ Give first the wife's Christian name; then my favorite name
    for her.

    _A._ (This was accurately done.)

    _Q._ What is your own name?

    _A._ Only you.

    _Q._ We are not quite sure of the meaning of the answer. Explain.

    _A._ Wife."

At a subsequent sitting the following questions and answers were
given:--

    "_Q._ Who are you that write?

    _A._ Wife.

    _Q._ But does no one tell wife what to write? If so, who?

    _A._ Spirit.

    _Q._ Whose spirit?

    _A._ Wife's brain.

    _Q._ But how does wife's brain know (certain) secrets?

    _A._ Wife's spirit unconsciously guides."

At a subsequent s�ance the following dialogue occurred:

    "_Q._ By what means are (unknown) secrets conveyed to wife's brain?

    _A._ What you call mesmeric influence.

    _Q._ What do you mean by 'what you call'? What do _you_ call it?

    _A._ Electro-biology.

    _Q._ By whom, or by what, is the electro-biologic force set in
    motion?

    _A._ I told you you could not know more than you did.

    _Q._ Can wife answer a question the reply to which I do not know?

    _A._ Why do you try to make me say what I won't?

    _Q._ Simply because I desire knowledge. _Why_ will you not tell?

    _A._ Wife could tell if some one else, with a very strong will, in
    the room knew."

These two cases clearly demonstrate the proposition that where an
operator can be found who is not dominated by the suggestion embraced
in the spiritistic hypothesis, he will not assume to be a spirit. If
he does entertain the spirit hypothesis, he _will_ assume that he is a
spirit, and answer accordingly. The mental and physical phenomena are
the same in the one case as in the other. The logical conclusion is
this: the fact that the intelligence which operates the pencil in the
one case claims that it is a disembodied spirit does not constitute
valid evidence that it is a spirit. We must look, therefore, to other
sources for evidence of spirit origin of the phenomena. Obviously the
only test by which that question can be settled is by the character of
the communications. When that test is applied, it is found that all
that is mysterious about them can be explained on the hypothesis of
telepathy or clairvoyance. In the mean time, the fact that the power
that writes is always amenable to control by suggestion, constitutes
the strongest presumptive evidence that it is the subjective mind of
the operator. This is the explanation which is afforded by a knowledge
of some of the laws governing the action of the subjective mind. The
_onus probandi_ rests with those who claim a supernatural origin for
the phenomenon.


TRANCE.

Under the general head of trance may be grouped all that class of
cases in which the objective faculties are, for the time being, held
in practically complete abeyance, and the subjective mind becomes
correspondingly active. Various names have been applied to this
condition, such as somnambulism, hypnosis, mesmeric trance, ecstasy,
catalepsy, obsession, etc., many of the names implying a theory of
causation rather than distinctive features of condition. The condition
varies in accordance with the idiosyncrasies of the individual as
much as from the causes which induce it. The leading characteristics
are, however, the same in all cases. These are, first, the partial or
complete abeyance of the objective mind; second, the activity of the
subjective mind; and, third, the perfect amenability of the latter to
control by the power of suggestion. Many remarkable mental phenomena
are developed in these states, but this discussion will be confined
to the supposed power of persons in the condition of trance to hold
intercourse with the spiritual world.

This power has been held to exist from time immemorial; the ancient
and modern mystical literature is filled with the most interesting,
not to say startling, accounts of interviews held by these persons
with the inhabitants of the spirit-land. Vast systems of religion have
been founded upon the supposed revelations of persons in a trance,
and untold millions of the human race base their hopes of a life in
a future world upon the dreams of ecstatics. The whole vast fabric
of Oriental philosophy and religion is based upon the revelations
of persons in a trance. The Swedenborgian philosophy in the Western
world is founded upon the dreams of a person who, in a condition
of a trance, believed himself to be able to hold familiar converse
with the inhabitants of heaven and of hell. Some of these systems of
spiritual philosophy are of such vast and complicated structure that
the mind is wrapped in wonder and admiration of their magnitude and
perfection. The Oriental philosophy, in particular, is so symmetrical,
so pervaded by grand and noble conceptions, so permeated with lofty
precepts of morality, humanity, and religion, that we are wont to lose
sight of the fact that the whole structure is built up by a process
of deductive reasoning from premises that have no better foundation
than the dreams of ecstatics. But we are told that it has stood the
test of thousands of years of thought and investigation, and that no
fact in physical science can be adduced to disprove its fundamental
principles. Doubtless this is true. The adepts have steered clear
of propositions in physical science which could be disproved by the
learning of the schoolboy. In this they have avoided those errors of
the Bible of the Christians, which, though unimportant in themselves,
having no bearing upon the real philosophy of the Christian religion,
have proved a stumbling-block to superficial minds. But does it follow
that because a proposition regarding the condition of affairs in the
spirit-world cannot be controverted by the science of the physical
world, the proposition must necessarily be true? Clearly not. Again,
does it follow that because a system of philosophy, the alleged
facts of which are necessarily undemonstrable, has stood the test of
thousands of years of investigation, it is necessarily correct? By no
means. Time has effected for the Oriental philosophy that which has
not been effected for the Western spiritual philosophy, simply for the
want of time; it has perfected it as a system. The lapse of time has
enabled the system to be evolved by the gradual but constant accretions
of human thought, from generation to generation, until it has grown,
from the first vague hope of the human soul for a life beyond the
grave, to its present stupendous proportions. The processes of its
growth can readily be seen and understood by a glance at the evolution
of our own spiritistic philosophy within the memory of men now living.
It is true that modern spiritism found a philosophy ready made to its
hand in the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg. His descriptions of the
spirit-world were in the main confirmed by the earlier mediums who
were acquainted with his writings. His was essentially a material
heaven. "As on earth, so in heaven," was his highest conception of the
beauties and glories of the land of "spirits of just men made perfect."
But he believed in hell, and he found one. He was inimical to certain
Christian sects, and he found that all who belonged to those sects were
condemned to everlasting punishment. When modern spiritism became a
belief, it found its most enthusiastic followers among those who were
outside of the pale of the Church, those who were in revolt against the
asceticism of the Puritan belief and practices, those who refused to
believe that a God of love and mercy would condemn any portion of his
creatures to everlasting fire. They found in the Rochester knockings
the first evidence which appealed to their senses of a life beyond
the tomb; and they consulted their mediums with perfect confidence
in their ability correctly to portray the condition of the denizens
of the land of spirits. They learned from those oracles that their
preconceived notions of divine justice were eminently correct, that
there was no such place as hell, and that all alike shared in the boon
of immortality; and, by a series of progressive steps, through seven
or eight concentric spheres, all at last reached the highest state of
divine felicity. They found that Swedenborg was right in the main, but
was a little incorrect in his information concerning hell. It would be
tedious, as well as superfluous, to enumerate the steps by which the
philosophy of modern spiritism has advanced from the crude notions of
the earlier writers to its present status. Every intelligent reader
will recognize the wide difference between the rhapsodic hodge-podge of
Andrew Jackson Davis and the calm philosophy of Judge Edmonds, and will
not fail to note how completely the latter is now superseded by modern
writers, who are gradually engrafting upon the indigenous stem the most
luxurious branches of the Oriental tree. What their philosophy will
be in coming years can be conjectured only by those who observe what
evolution has done for the Oriental philosophy during the thousands of
years of its existence.

The process of this evolution is easy to understand. The earlier
mediums adopted the doctrines of Swedenborg, with certain amendments
which seemed to them to be more in accord with reason and Divine
justice. Those who followed, in turn adopted the main ideas of their
predecessors, with amendments of their own. Each writer in succession
amended the work of his predecessors in those respects in which it
seemed to him to be imperfect, and each one had authority from the
spirit-world which sanctioned the amendment. And thus the system grows
in magnitude and perfection, and will continue to grow as long as men
believe themselves to be inspired by extramundane intelligences.

Now, the noteworthy facts connected with this evolutionary process
are, first, that all believe that they obtain their authority for
every statement of fact and every new idea direct from the spirits of
the dead; and secondly, that every man who evolves a new idea, or is
possessed of an old one, can easily have it confirmed by consulting a
spirit medium, providing the proper suggestion is made to said medium.
And this is true of all classes and ranks of mediums, from the common
table-tipper to the Oriental ecstatic. If the medium is possessed of
ideas of his own, and no outside suggestion is made, he will obtain
information from the spirit world in exact accordance with his ideas.
The same is true of all trance-seers, by whatever means the trance is
brought about. Thus, Cahagnet, the French mesmerist, who devoted his
life to mesmerizing subjects for the sole purpose of ascertaining what
was going on in heaven, once mesmerized a French peasant, and directed
him to visit the abode of the blest. This he promptly did, and reported
that he saw a great white throne, surrounded by a great throng of
people, all dressed in the most gorgeous apparel. On the throne was
seated a man who was much larger than any of the rest, and who was
further distinguished by the superior cut, make, fit, and material of
his clothes. The peasant was sure that he had seen the Almighty, and so
reported. It is obvious that he had simply seen a vision representing
a peasant's idea of heaven. Cahagnet assured him that he must be
mistaken, and quoted Bible authority to show that God himself has said,
"There shall no man see me, and live." This was convincing to the
simple-minded peasant, and Cahagnet advised him, the next time he was
entranced, to ascertain if it was not a conclave of leading spirits
that he saw, who were assembled for some purpose connected with the
internal economy of heaven. Accordingly, he made inquiries the next
time he was entranced, and ascertained that Cahagnet was right. It is
clear that Cahagnet did not understand the law of suggestion, or his
book would never have been written. It is scarcely necessary to remark
that his book obtained a wide circulation, was translated into several
languages, and constituted a standard mesmeric text-book for many years.

I have said that the same law of suggestion governs all trance-seers.
This is obviously true. If it is a law, it is universal in its
application. Yet Orientalists tell us that their visions are veridical,
"because," they say, "they are objective visions." This, of course,
is merely begging the question. They hold that the visions and other
communications obtained by Western spiritists are mere "subjective
hallucinations." It is noteworthy that the distinction which they make
between the two kinds of visions is this: those visions which accord
with their views are "objective;" those which do not are "subjective."
It is a very easy and comforting distinction, but it forcibly
reminds one of the old definition of orthodoxy as distinguished from
heterodoxy: "Orthodoxy is my doxy, and heterodoxy is your doxy." The
Oriental adepts claim that they have learned much more of the laws of
nature than is dreamed of in Occidental philosophy. Doubtless they
have, if half the stories we hear of them are true. They have learned
to produce phenomena which far transcend anything done by our spirit
mediums. Moreover, they have learned the true source of the power, and
they do not ascribe it to spirits of the dead. Said one of them, in my
hearing: "I have often been asked the question, 'What is an adept?'
An adept is a spirit medium who knows that the power to produce his
phenomena resides within himself, and who possesses the intelligence
and power to control and direct it." This is the exact truth in a
nutshell. But because the adepts have acquired the knowledge of the
laws which govern the production of phenomena, and are able to apply
them, it does not follow that they are able to set any law of nature
at defiance, or that they can claim exemption from the operation of
a universal law of our existence. We find in the Western world that
the law of suggestion controls all subjective phenomena, of whatever
name or nature, and we are slow to believe that Eastern people are
exempt from the operations of the same law. If they are, the burden
of proof rests upon them to demonstrate it. Thus far it has not been
demonstrated.

The literature of mysticism of all ages of the world and of all nations
is full of accounts of the visions of ecstatics. The one noteworthy
fact that is observable in all is that each one sees and hears that
which he expects to see or hear. The details may be unexpected, and
the whole may transcend his objective conceptions, but none controvert
their preconceived ideas. Catholic ecstatics will see Catholic visions,
and Protestants will see Protestant visions. In short, whatever may
be the belief or the philosophy of the ecstatic, confirmation of
that belief will be found in his visions of, or his communications
from, the other world. The history of the Catholic Church abounds
in accounts of wonderful visions seen by nuns and other religious
devotees of that faith. One noteworthy fact constantly reappears in
that connection, which is, that they nearly always become entranced
after long contemplation of the image of the Saviour or of the Virgin
Mary. This fact is interesting from a purely scientific standpoint. The
physical attitude which they assume in contemplation of the crucifix
is the one most conducive to the induction of the hypnotic condition.
The significance of this observation will be at once apparent when we
remember that Dr. Braid demonstrated that fixed gazing upon an object
held in such a position as to cause the eyes to be strained upward is
the easiest way to induce the hypnotic condition. The attitude, both
physical and mental, of prayer, is therefore the one most favorable to
the induction of the hypnotic or trance condition on the one hand, and,
on the other, to the production of the visions which accord with the
faith and expectancy of the individual.

The fact that the physical attitude assumed in prayer has a tendency
to induce the subjective condition, will account for many of the
well-recognized effects of earnest supplication of Divine favor. That
calm tranquillity of mind which follows the prayer of faith may be
attributed, in part at least, to the physical condition resulting from
partial hypnosis. The objective faculties are held in abeyance, the
nerves are tranquillized, and that part of "God in us" holds communion
and is harmonized with its Divine source. Thus it is that long and
earnest prayer for the restoration of health is often followed by
marvellous results, especially when it is inspired by perfect faith
in the promises of the Master. The fact that faith constitutes a
strong suggestion to the subjective mind, which in turn controls
the condition of the body, does not militate against the idea of
Divine agency in the result. It is the Divine essence within us which
produces the effect, and it operates in strict accordance with Divine
law. It confirms and explains that which Christ taught so earnestly
and so persistently, namely, that we must have faith, or our prayers
will avail nothing. That he understood the principle involved, goes
without saying; but it was not yet time to give it to the world, for
the world was not prepared to receive it. "I have many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now," were his words, uttered during
his last interview with his disciples previous to his crucifixion.
His was the "dispensation of faith." The promised "dispensation of
knowledge" has not yet been inaugurated; when it is, the wisdom which
he taught will be better understood, for it will then be known that the
doctrines which he enunciated regarding his power over disease, and the
conditions of immortality, were but statements in strict accordance
with scientific facts.


OBSESSION.

Webster defines "obsession" as "the state of a person vexed or besieged
by an evil spirit, antecedent to possession." The latter term he
defines as "the state of being possessed, as by an evil spirit," etc.
Allan Kardec employs obsession as a generic term, to include _simple
obsession_, which accords with Webster's definition of the term;
_fascination_, which is "an illusion produced by direct action on the
medium's thought," paralyzing his judgment; and _subjugation_, which
completely paralyzes the will, and causes the medium to act in spite
of himself. For our purpose these fine distinctions are immaterial,
as they merely represent different stages or degrees of intensity
of the same phenomenon. The theory of obsession is a modernizing of
the old idea of being possessed of a devil, or devils, as the case
might be. It consists in being dominated, to a greater or less extent,
by the idea that the person is besieged or controlled by a foreign
spirit, good or bad, angel or devil. It seems superfluous to remark
that the same principles prevail in these cases as in all others where
the idea of spirits has been suggested to the subjective mind. It
matters not how the suggestion originated, the result is the same. In
ancient times the idea prevailed that any one was liable at any time
to be taken possession of by a devil. When that idea was in vogue it
frequently happened that persons who easily entered the subjective
condition found themselves possessed of one or more devils. In those
times the profession of exorcist was very profitable. The priesthood
generally monopolized the business, for the obvious reason that they
were supposed to entertain a spirit of more or less antagonism to
devils generally. Besides, devils were supposed to have a mortal fear
of anything holy; they had an especial dread of the sight of a copy of
the Scriptures, and of hearing the name of God pronounced. Accordingly
it came to pass that, upon the command of the exorcist, the devil would
often incontinently fly, leaving the patient in his normal condition.
Sometimes, however, he would be more stubborn, and the patient would
go into convulsions upon hearing the magic words pronounced; and then
more severe measures would have to be adopted, such as employing more
exorcists. But persistence was generally rewarded with success.

In later years devils have generally gone out of fashion, and their
place is taken by bad spirits of dead men. And so it has come to pass
that many spirit mediums are sorely afflicted with spirits, who pester
them most outrageously. The exorcist is now replaced by the family
doctor, who is generally scientific to the last degree, and accordingly
endeavors to get rid of the spirit by means of physic or clysters.
Recently, however, such cases have been treated successfully by means
of hypnotism, which is the obvious remedy, in case the hypnotist
realizes the power of suggestion.

It is obvious to those who have followed our argument thus far that the
subjective mind of the person obsessed is dominated by the suggestion
that it is a bad spirit or a devil, as the case may be; and that,
acting upon that suggestion, it will personate the spirit or devil
with the same extraordinary acumen that it would personate any other
character suggested. And it will assume to be one, two, or seven devils
or spirits, in accordance with the suggestion, and will exhibit as many
different kinds and degrees of deviltry as there are devils embraced in
the suggestion.

Such cases are frequently characterized by the development of
wonderful telepathic power; and this of course adds to the mystery and
confirms his friends in the idea that the patient is controlled by an
extramundane agency. But, while it adds to the mystery, it does not
militate against the soundness of the explanation afforded by the laws
of duality and suggestion. The ceremony of exorcism by the priests in
ancient times constituted a most powerful suggestive command, which
could not, and did not, fail in having the desired effect. There was
an interval, however, between the days of priestly exorcism and the
days of modern hypnotism, during which scepticism prevailed regarding
the power of any one to exorcise an offending spirit, or to cure the
patient by other than material remedies. Patients were then sent to
insane asylums, only to increase their maladies. But in later years
the power of hypnotic suggestion has become a recognized principle in
therapeutics, and little trouble is experienced in curing obsessed
patients where the brain has not become diseased. The fact that the
trouble is susceptible of cure by hypnotic suggestion points clearly
to its mental origin, and precludes the possibility of its being
attributable to supermundane causes.


DUAL PERSONALITY.

Cognate in some of its essential characteristics to the phenomenon
of obsession is that of _dual personality_; and although it has
nothing to do with the question of spiritism, it may as well be noted
here as elsewhere. By this term is not meant the duality of mental
organization which pertains to every human being, but it refers to a
specific phenomenon which has received that name from recent scientific
observers. It is characterized by a complete loss of knowledge of
personal identity. The patient assumes a new name, a new personality,
and a new character, the last being often in marked contrast to the
normal one in every essential particular. The old personality is
sometimes completely forgotten, and sometimes it is remembered only as
a person whom the patient has once known. In some instances the two
personalities alternate at somewhat irregular intervals. In others, the
phenomenon occurs only once in a lifetime. In others, several different
personalities will be assumed at different times. In all these
cases certain characteristics constantly reappear, the most notable
appearing in the fact that the new personality is always consistent
with itself; that is, it is always the same, whenever it reappears.
Its moral characteristics are sometimes in marked contrast to the
lifelong character developed in the normal state, but it never varies
from one time to another. If a dozen different personalities should
be assumed at different times, each would always be consistent with
itself. The incidents occurring during the continuance of one interval
of the abnormal personality will always be remembered whenever the same
personality reappears, so that the existence of the new personality,
when it reappears with frequency, is practically continuous; that is,
the intervals of normal consciousness do not seem to be remembered. The
normal personality, however, never remembers aught of what occurred
during the abnormal interval. As before remarked, the abnormal
personality sometimes remembers the existence of the normal one, but
always as that of a third person, upon whom it often looks, and of
whom it sometimes speaks, with pitying contempt. It generally happens,
in case two or more abnormal personalities are assumed, that each
remembers all the other abnormal characters, but regards them as third
persons having no connection whatever with itself.

One of the most remarkable cases which have been reported in the United
States was that of one Ansel Bourne, a Baptist clergyman, who suddenly
disappeared from his home in Rhode Island a few years ago. Every effort
was made to find him, but without avail. At the end of two months he
returned to his home, after an experience of the strangest character.
It appears, from an investigation conducted in the most careful and
painstaking manner, in behalf of the London Society for Psychical
Research, that Mr. Bourne lost normal consciousness soon after leaving
home, and wandered around in several different towns and cities,
finally reaching Norristown, Pa., where he rented a store, stocked
it with small wares, and carried it on successfully for a period of
six weeks, under the name of A.J. Brown. He appeared to the citizens
of Norristown as a normal person, conducting his business properly,
contracting no unnecessary debts, and always paying promptly. At the
end of six weeks of a mercantile career he suddenly regained his
normal consciousness, and remembered nothing whatever of his abnormal
experience. The article in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical
Research, written by Richard Hodgson, LL.D., exhibits exhaustive
research in the investigation of this case, and its entire verity
cannot be doubted. It appears that Mr. Bourne had once, in early life,
had a remarkable experience, which shows a tendency to abnormal psychic
conditions; but nothing was developed which throws any light upon any
specific cause for the particular phase of his later experience. He
had never before engaged in trade, nor had he had any taste for such a
life, and nothing could be remembered which could explain why it was
that he assumed the name of A.J. Brown. It is stated, however, that he
had once been hypnotized, when young, and made to perform many amusing
antics on the stage; but no recollection was had that the name of A.J.
Brown had been suggested to him at the time. It is extremely probable,
however, that that name _was_ suggested to him at that time, and that
his subjective mind retained the memory of the name, and that the
impression lasted all those years, only to reappear when he again went
into a hypnotic trance. This is only a conjecture, however; but it has
been shown in a previous chapter how the subjective mind of a young
lady retained the impression of its identity with a certain fictitious
character, which she had once assumed in a play, and with which it
again identified itself in obedience to her suggestion, made when she
was in the normal condition.

Again, it is a common stage experiment in hypnotism to suggest some
name to the subject, and some character in which he is made to act,
that of a merchant being not uncommon. When we remember how lasting
are such impressions upon the subjective mind, and how prone they are
to reappear at any subsequent time when the same conditions exist, we
are prepared to believe that such a suggestion, made in early life,
would be an ample explanation of the subsequent event. The fact that
the suggestion, whatever it was and by whomsoever it was made, was
made while the subject was in the hypnotic condition, and could not,
therefore, be remembered objectively, explains why it is that in few,
if any, of such cases can any clew be obtained as to the origin of the
suggestion, or any reason assigned for the assumption of any particular
personality.

The dual character of the persons thus afflicted constitutes the most
indubitable evidence of the duality of man's mental organism, and it
is beginning to be so recognized by European scientific observers.
Some of them say, however, "If this is evidence of duality of mind,
what shall we say of those who exhibit a triple personality? Is that
an evidence of a trinity of mind?" The question is pertinent, and
is easily answered. It is obvious that the persons exhibiting the
phenomenon are in a hypnotic trance, and are, therefore, governed by
the laws pertaining to hypnotism. They have an objective mind, which
is the controlling power in the normal condition. In the hypnotic
state the normal, or objective, faculties are in abeyance, and the
person is amenable to control by the power of suggestion. Whatever
name or character is then suggested is at once assumed by the subject.
The suggestion may be oral, and proceed from another; or it may be
an auto-suggestion, arising from something suggested in a previous
hypnotization, or from some forgotten circumstance. Be that as it
may, the suggested character is assumed and carried out with all the
deductive logical exactitude characteristic of subjective reasoning.
This is a well-known result of a common hypnotic experiment. It is
also well known that the subject can be made to assume any number
of characters by the same process. It is a common stage experiment
to cause a versatile subject, who is easily controlled, to assume a
dozen different characters in the course of an evening's performance.
It is obvious, therefore, that persons who are afflicted with a
second personality, which occasionally takes possession of them, are
also liable to assume a third, or, indeed, any number of names and
characters, if anything happens to suggest them. In fact, the power
of suggestion over the subjective mind, in the line of multiplication
of characters, is practically unlimited. It is not a multiplication
of personalities, however, nor an evidence of a triple or a quadruple
personality, but merely an exhibition of the power of the second, or
subjective, personality of man to assume, in obedience to the law of
suggestion, any number of real or imaginary characters. The same power
is exhibited by the subjective personality of a spirit medium when it
assumes the names and characters of any number of spirits of the dead,
whose names are suggested.

The specific character of the mental operations of persons in whom
the second personality is abnormally developed has not been recorded,
so far as we are aware. It will be found, however, when observations
are made in that direction, that they have practically no capacity
for reasoning by the inductive process when under the control of the
second personality. This will certainly be the case if the hypnosis
is perfect. Otherwise it might be modified by the synchronous action
of the objective mind. It is hoped that future observers will direct
their attention to this question, to the end that a series of facts may
be collated which shall assist in determining the direction and extent,
as well as the exact limitations, of subjective mental power. When that
is accomplished, the first great step will have been taken in bringing
psychology within the domain of the exact sciences.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIX.

THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    The Intelligence manifested.--It is a Human Intelligence.--Inherent
    Probabilities.--Conditions requisite.--The Best Conditions.--A
    Living Organism necessary.--The Laws of Telepathy and
    Suggestion prevail.--Slate-Writing.--A Wonderful Slate-Writing
    S�ance.--Telepathic and Psycho-Physical Power displayed
    in Perfection.--Demonstration of its Mundane Origin.--An
    Unexpected Phenomenon.--Summary of Results.--Syllogism.--General
    Conclusions.--Spiritistic Phenomena do not constitute Valid
    Evidence of a Life beyond the Grave.--An Argument for Immortality.


The physical phenomena of spiritism are in more senses than one the
most interesting of all the manifestations of subjective power. They
require, however, but a brief treatment at our hands, for the reason
that the primary object of this book is to deal with the mental powers
and attributes of mankind in their relations to psychic phenomena. No
attempt, therefore, will be made to prove that the alleged physical
phenomena of so-called spiritism are veridical or otherwise. It would
be a work of supererogation to attempt to add force or volume to the
already overwhelming array of testimony going to show the wonderful
physical power often displayed in connection with psychic phenomena.
For our purposes it is not a matter of vital importance whether things
can be made to levitate without physical contact or not. It will be
assumed, therefore, that all statements made by respectable witnesses
in regard to the occurrence of physical phenomena are true. We do
this partly because we believe them to be true, having seen enough
to _know_ the reality of the leading physical phenomena, and partly
because our purpose is to deal with the mental aspects of psychic
phenomena, and the laws which pertain to their development. We shall
leave to those who are sceptical, or who think they are sceptical
rather than ignorant, the task of investigating, after the ponderous
and elaborate methods of the scientists, phenomena which can be
verified beyond the possible shadow of a doubt, by the exercise of a
little common-sense. And we will here undertake to guarantee that if
any scientific gentleman will, in good faith, follow the suggestions
offered in former chapters of this book regarding the proper method of
dealing with so-called mediums, and will divest himself, for the time
being, of all fear of professional mediums and all prejudice against
them, he will not only see enough to convince him of the truth of all
that is alleged regarding physical phenomena, but he will also see
that the elaborate test conditions often insisted upon by scientific
investigators are superfluous, not to say absurd. These remarks are,
of course, applicable to the better class of mediums, that is, those
who are recognized by the great body of spiritists as possessing a high
order of mediumistic power. Their moral characteristics need not count
as a factor, for it is to the interest of a medium to produce genuine
phenomena when he can, and he will always do so if the conditions are
favorable. Mediums are always anxious to exhibit their phenomena, when
genuine, under test conditions, and will do so in a way that shall
satisfy the most sceptical. A further qualification of the foregoing
remarks should be made in regard to "materializing" mediums. The writer
has never seen anything genuine in the line of materializations.
There is here more room for fraud, and more fraud is perpetrated by
materializing mediums than by any other, because materialization is a
rare and difficult phase of mediumship. Yet there is every reason to
believe, and we shall undertake to show further on, that the production
of genuine apparitions, resembling the persons they profess to
represent, is a possibility within the range of psychic power.

The remarks which follow will therefore be addressed, not to those
who are not yet convinced of the reality of physical phenomena,
but to those who are aware of their reality, but attribute them to
extramundane causes.

There is one pregnant fact connected with these manifestations which
all will admit, and that is that there is an intelligence which directs
and controls them. This intelligence is that of disembodied spirits,
or it is not. If it is not, it must be that of embodied spirits. These
propositions, if not self-evident, will at least be admitted to be
true by those who believe that it proceeds from disembodied spirits of
human beings. The intelligence is a human intelligence,--that is, it is
characterized by human imperfections and limitations; and, as all human
beings must be classified as either living or dead, we must look to one
class or the other for the source of the phenomena.

The first question in order is, What are the inherent probabilities?
Conceding the power to exist, it would seem to be more inherently
probable that it is possessed by a soul connected with a living
organism, than it is that it is possessed by a soul that has been
entirely severed from all connection with the material world.
Spiritists themselves unwittingly concede the truth of this proposition
when they assert, as does Allan Kardec, on the authority, as he says,
of "the spirit of Saint Louis," that "the spirits who produce these
effects are always inferior spirits, who are not entirely disengaged
from material influence."[37] Besides, the very fact that the
intervention of a "medium" is necessary for the production of physical
phenomena demonstrates the proposition that the elements of physical
organism are essential. It requires, therefore, two things to produce
the phenomena; namely, a soul and a body. In a living man the two are
united and working in harmony. Is it not probable that such an organism
is capable of producing all the effects attributed to the temporary
union of a dead man's soul and a living man's body? If not, why not?
Why should a dead man's spirit in abnormal union with a living man's
body possess more power than a living man's spirit in normal union with
his own body? Is it because the former possesses more knowledge than
the latter? No, for we have seen that it is only "inferior spirits" who
are capable of producing physical manifestations. Superior knowledge
confers no advantage; for, as Kardec informs us, the superior spirits
have no power in that direction. We have, therefore, the authority of
the spiritists themselves for formulating the proposition that the more
completely the spirit of a man is "disengaged from material influence,"
the less power he possesses to produce physical phenomena. This being
true, it follows that the converse of the proposition is true, namely,
that the more completely the spirit of a man is united to material
elements, the greater is his power to produce such phenomena. The
conclusion is irresistible that the spirit of a man in normal union
with his own body possesses the power in perfection.

If, therefore, we can find in abstract reasoning no warrant for the
assumption that the phenomena are produced by disembodied spirits, we
must look elsewhere for evidence of their extramundane origin. The
first inquiry naturally suggesting itself is, What internal evidence
is contained in the character of the manifestations which would enable
one to form a correct judgment regarding their probable source? We
have already seen that reasoning from their physical character leads
us to the conclusion that the physical power displayed must have a
physical basis, and that that basis is probably the physical organism
of the medium. Now, if its intellectual character leads us in the same
direction, the evidence is still stronger in favor of its purely human
origin. We presume that no one will dispute the proposition that the
communications received through the physical phenomena are governed by
the same laws as those received by means of the other methods which
have been discussed. Indeed, the fact is almost self-evident. They
have the same origin, and must be governed by the same laws. The
remarks, therefore, which have been made concerning the character of
the communications obtained by other than physical means apply with
full force to those obtained through physical demonstrations. The
laws of telepathy and suggestion play their subtle _r�le_ in the one
case the same as in the other. If possible, there is less evidence of
extramundane origin in the physical manifestations than there is in
the intellectual. Indeed, this might be pre-supposed, from the gross
character of the former, even though the latter had a purely spiritual
source. If, therefore, we find no valid evidence of extramundane
origin in the higher manifestations, it is a waste of time to seek for
evidence of spirit intercourse in the tipping of kitchen tables, the
levitation of parlor sofas, or the convulsions of whole sets of chamber
furniture.

The foregoing remarks apply to all forms and grades of physical
phenomena, of which there are many. Some of them possess the most
intense interest, not only on account of the wonderful psycho-physical
power displayed, but because of their intellectual phases.
Slate-writing, for instance, when performed by a first-class medium,
gifted with a high order of telepathic power, accompanied by other
necessary intellectual qualifications, is one of the most interesting
of all phases of psychic power. An instance which occurred within the
writer's own experience will be here related, for the reason that it
fully illustrates the essential qualifications and characteristics of
a first-class medium, shows both the physical and mental powers with
which he is endowed, and clearly defines the limitations which hedge
him about, and which point, with unerring exactitude, to the source of
the phenomena.

A few years ago, a conversation which the writer had with a celebrated
Union general led to an agreement to visit a prominent slate-writing
medium, then sojourning in the city of Washington. Among other things,
it was agreed that the general should be the sitter, and that he should
be guided entirely by my suggestions relative to the course which he
should pursue before and during the s�ance.

My object, which he fully understood and appreciated, was, first, to
convince him of the genuineness of the physical phenomena,--that is,
that the slate-writing was performed without corporeal contact of
the medium with the pencil, and without the shadow of a possibility
of the employment of legerdemain; and, secondly, to demonstrate the
utter impossibility of the phenomena being attributable to disembodied
spirits.

It must be premised that the medium was in the habit of causing his
sitters to write six short letters to as many different spirits.
These epistles are written on separate pieces of paper about three
inches square, and are addressed to the spirits by name and signed by
the writer, precisely as an ordinary letter would be addressed and
signed. Each letter is then rolled into a wad as small as possible, and
retained in the hand of the sitter until he is requested to deposit
them in a pile on the table. When this is done, the medium reaches
his hand across the table and touches the wads with the tips of his
fingers, the sitter meanwhile watching the proceeding closely, to
prevent the possibility of fraud. After the medium has touched each
bit of paper the sitter resumes possession of them and retains them
for future reference. It may be here remarked that a sitter has the
privilege of bringing his own slates with him, and retaining possession
of them until the writing is finished. They need not leave his custody
for an instant. He may place the bit of pencil between them himself,
and then securely lock or tie them together, and hold them as tightly
as he chooses on the top of the table, in the broad light of day, while
the writing is going on.

The plan suggested to the general on this occasion, and which he
carried out to the letter, was as follows:--

1. To write three letters to as many spirits of his dead acquaintances,
each one couched in general terms,--such as, "Dear B., can you
communicate with me to-day? If so, tell me your condition in the
spirit-land." This could be answered by very general remarks, and would
require no specific answer involving any knowledge of the sitter's
affairs or anything else.

2. To write two similar letters to two persons known to the sitter, but
unknown to the medium, to be still living in the flesh.

3. To write one letter to a deceased person, asking a specific
question, the correct answer to which neither the sitter nor the medium
could possibly know.

4. To place the medium at his ease, by leading him to believe that he
had to deal with a sympathetic believer in the doctrine of spiritism,
who had perfect faith in the medium's powers.

5. To prescribe no test conditions whatever, but let the medium have
his own way in everything.

6. Under no circumstances to let the medium know the name or
antecedents of the sitter.

These suggestions were carried out to the letter. The general was
unknown to the medium, and was introduced by the writer under a
fictitious name. The medium occupied a suite of rooms consisting of a
large double parlor separated by folding-doors. The front parlor was
used as a reception-room, and the back parlor as a s�ance-room. The
latter was lighted by one large window, in front of which stood an
old-fashioned square dining-table. The medium seated himself on one
side of this table, and the sitter occupied a chair on the opposite
side. Several slates were lying on the table, two of which the medium
washed clean and then gave them into the custody of the sitter,
who carefully examined them, and kept them in his possession until
the s�ance was over, resting his arms upon them while he wrote the
prescribed letters. He was particularly cautious about writing the
letters, carefully guarding them so that it was impossible for the
medium to see the writing with his natural eyes, and never lifted his
elbows from the two slates in his custody. When the letters were all
finished and rolled into wads, they were placed upon the table directly
between the medium and the sitter, the latter never allowing his eyes
to wander from them for an instant. The medium then touched each wad
with his finger-tips, when they were again taken possession of by the
sitter.

It should be stated that the s�ance, thus far, was not witnessed
by myself; but the circumstances were afterwards detailed by the
general, whose perfect trustworthiness is beyond question. At this
juncture--that is, while the wads were still lying on the table--a
most remarkable incident happened. The medium suddenly arose, opened
the folding-doors, and invited me in to take part in the s�ance. After
resuming his seat, he remarked to me: "There is a spirit here who
refuses to communicate until you are allowed to be present. He says
his name is G---- (mentioning a common Christian name). Have you any
deceased friend by that name?" I answered, No, not remembering, for the
moment, any one bearing that name. The medium then handed me a pencil,
and said: "Touch one of those wads with the pencil; then open it, and
you will find that it is a letter addressed to G----."

I touched one of the six wads, at random of course, and upon opening
it found, to my surprise, that it was a letter addressed by the sitter
to his deceased brother G----. The brother was also a very dear friend
of mine; but his exalted position in life precluded me from ever
addressing him by his Christian name, and I had not been consciously
thinking of him during the s�ance. Then the medium again addressed me,
as follows:--

"Fold the letter again, place it with the others, and mix them all
together. Then take the pencil and touch another wad; and the one you
touch you will find to be a letter addressed to M----."

This was done, and the wad touched proved to be a letter addressed to
the party named by the medium. A third time this feat was performed
with the same result. To say that we were surprised is but feebly
to express our emotions. The first success might be attributable to
coincidence, supposing the medium to be in possession of the name. The
chances were one to six, and it is within easy range of coincidence
that I should have hit upon the right letter. In the second trial the
chances were also one to six, _per se_; but the chances that I should
succeed twice in succession were largely against me; and the fact
that I succeeded three times in succession in pointing out the right
letter removes the matter far outside the domain of coincidence. When
we take into account the telepathic power displayed by the medium, and
that other power, whatever it may have been, which transformed me for
the moment into an automaton, the incident will be seen to possess an
extraordinary interest and importance. I should here remark that that
was the first and only experience of my own in the domain of subjective
automatism, and that I did not experience any sensation which could
lead me to suppose that I was not in a perfectly normal condition,
mentally and physically.

The most remarkable part of the performance, however, is yet to be
related. The sitter meantime did not lose his presence of mind, but
carefully guarded the pair of slates in his custody, never lifting his
arms from them as they lay upon the table before him. Nor did he for an
instant lose sight of the wads of paper which he placed upon the table.
The medium touched them with his finger-tips alone, as before related;
and after I had pointed out the three letters, they were taken into the
custody of the sitter. This done, the medium said to the sitter: "Open
the slates, and you will find a communication from G----." This was
done, and the promised communication was found, addressed to the sitter
by name and signed by G----, the name of the sitter's brother. In fact,
it was a pertinent answer to the letter written by the sitter to his
brother, addressed as the sitter had signed his name, and signed as the
sitter's brother had been addressed.

The medium then became considerably agitated, and moved with convulsive
rapidity. He seized two other slates, washed them, submitted them
for inspection, and placed them upon the centre of the table before
us, with a bit of black pencil between them. He then invited us to
place our hands upon the slate with him. This we did, whereupon the
writing began. We could distinctly hear the pencil move with a gentle,
but rapid, scratching sound. In a few minutes three raps were heard,
apparently made by the pencil between the slates. This was said to be
the signal announcing the completion of the message. The slates were
then separated, and several messages were found inside.

Two more slates were then seized by the medium, washed, submitted
for inspection, and placed upon the table as before. Our hands were
again placed upon the slates, and the writing again began. After
it had progressed for a few moments, the medium announced that the
spirits wanted to write in colors. He thereupon arose, walked to the
mantelpiece, and produced a box of colored crayons, all in small bits,
about the size of the piece of black slate pencil with which the
writing had been done. We were about to open the slates, to allow the
insertion of the crayons, when the medium said that it was unnecessary,
as "the colors could be got from the outside just as well." The box of
crayons was accordingly placed beside the slate, and the writing was
resumed. After a short interval the signal was given that the messages
were finished. The general thereupon very carefully separated the
slates, to see if there were any colored crayons concealed therein.
Only the bit of black slate pencil was there, but four or five
different colors had been used in writing the messages.

The results of this s�ance may be summed up as follows:

The contents of every letter written by the sitter were evidently
known to the intelligence which wrote the replies, for every letter
received an appropriate answer, save one, which will be noted further
on. The answer to each letter was addressed to the name signed to the
corresponding letter, and each answer was signed with the name of the
person to whom the corresponding letter was addressed.

Six letters were written by the sitter, as before stated. Three of
them were written to deceased friends of the sitter, and were couched
in such general terms that the replies did not require any specific
knowledge on the part of the intelligence which wrote the replies.

Two of the letters were written to living persons, and they were also
couched in general terms, requiring no specific knowledge to enable an
appropriate reply to be framed.

Each of these five letters received a reply which assumed that its
writer was a denizen of the spirit-land. There was no difference in
their replies so far as that was concerned.

The sixth letter was addressed to a deceased relative, and was as
follows, omitting names:--

    DEAR A.B.,--Whom did you desire to have appointed administrator of
    your estate? (Signed) C.D.

To this letter the only reply was from the medium's "control," who
reported as follows:--

    "A.B. is here, but cannot communicate to-day."

The conclusions which are inevitable may be summed as follows:--

1. The slate-writing was done without physical contact with the
pencil, either by the medium or any one else. It all occurred in broad
daylight. The slates were not handled by the medium, except to wash
them and to place his hands upon them (in all cases but one) while the
writing was going on. The slates were not for an instant out of sight
of the sitter during the whole s�ance, nor were they out of his custody
during that time, after they were washed by the medium. They were then
carefully inspected by the sitter, the pencil was placed between them
by the sitter, they were tied together by the sitter, and opened by him
after the writing was finished. In short, there was no chance for fraud
or legerdemain, and there was none.

2. The power which moved the pencil, being clearly not physical, must
have been occult. This occult power was either that of disembodied
spirits, or that of the medium. Did it proceed from disembodied
spirits? Let us see. The replies to the five letters emanated from
the same source; that is to say, if the replies to any of them were
from disembodied spirits, they were all from disembodied spirits. They
were clearly not all from disembodied spirits, for two of the letters
were addressed to living persons, and the replies were of the same
character as the others. The logical conclusion is inevitable that none
of the replies were from disembodied spirits. To put it in the simple
form of a syllogism, we have the following:--

The replies to the five letters were all from the same source.

Two of them were not from disembodied spirits.

Therefore, none of them were from disembodied spirits.

Again:

The power to produce the slate-writing emanated either from disembodied
spirits or from the medium.

It did not emanate from disembodied spirits.

Therefore, it emanated from the medium.

Having now logically traced the phenomenon to the door of the
medium, let us see what further evidence there is in support of that
conclusion. And first let us inquire, Is there anything inherently
improbable in the theory that he was the source of the intelligence
which guided, and the power which moved, the pencil? Was there any
intellectual feat performed which rendered it impossible that he should
have been its author? The power to read the contents of the six letters
was obviously within the domain of telepathy. He was, therefore, just
as well equipped for the performance of that feat as a disembodied
spirit could be. Suggestion also plays its subtle _r�le_ in this
class of phenomena, as in all others, and relieves the medium of all
imputation of dishonesty or insincerity in attributing it to the wrong
source. The probability that the power to move the pencil without
physical contact resides in the medium, is as great, at least, as the
probability that it resides in disembodied spirits. All these questions
have, however, been fully discussed, and are mentioned here merely to
complete the chain of reasoning.

There was nothing apparent in the answers to the five letters mentioned
which would indicate that they emanated from any source other than
the medium. They contained no information possessed exclusively by
disembodied spirits, although they all purported to emanate from them.
The five letters were not, however, framed for the purpose of testing
the knowledge possessed by spirits, but merely to show that the replies
did not emanate from that source.

The sixth letter, however, _was_ framed for the express purpose of
testing the knowledge possessed by the intelligence which moved
the pencil. The question, "Whom did you desire to have appointed
administrator of your estate?" was asked because the sitter did not
know the correct answer, and he knew that the medium could not know.
The knowledge was possessed by the deceased person exclusively; and
it is reasonable to suppose that if he was present, as the medium
declared that he was, he would have given the desired information.
The intelligence which wrote the replies was in full possession of
the contents of all the letters, all the names addressed, and all
the signatures, including those of the sixth letter. The answers to
five of them were pertinent and intelligent, no specific knowledge
being required. But when the sixth was reached, the spirit "could
not communicate to-day." Why? Simply because the specific knowledge
required to answer the question was not in the possession of any one
present, and it could not, therefore, be obtained telepathically, as
the knowledge of the contents of the other letters was obtained.

This is the rock upon which all so-called spirit intercourse splits.
Everything goes along swimmingly as long as the medium knows what
to reply, or can obtain information by means of his telepathic or
clairvoyant powers. But the moment he is confronted by a question
requiring knowledge not obtainable in that way, he fails dismally.

The circumstances of this s�ance have been detailed for the reason that
it was a typical s�ance. It displayed all the essential characteristics
of modern spirit intercourse, so-called. The medium displayed all
the essential powers and attributes of good mediumship. The physical
phenomena were produced to perfection, and under the most perfect
test-conditions. The telepathic powers displayed were of the most
extraordinary character, and the conditions under which they were
produced were also such as to preclude the possibility of fraud or
legerdemain. The results were also perfect in their character, showing,
as they did, both the powers of the medium and his limitations. The
dual character of the human mind was also clearly manifested, and the
perfect amenability of the subjective entity to control by the power of
suggestion was demonstrated.

It would be interesting to pursue the subject of physical
manifestations further, and to examine all their multiform
characteristics; but that would be foreign to the purposes of this
book. The examination of the mental characteristics of the intelligence
which controls the different manifestations is our only purpose,
and we have shown that the same laws prevail in all. It is believed
that enough has been said to enable the conscientious investigator,
who wishes to test the correctness of our hypothesis, to apply its
fundamental propositions to all psychic phenomena. It is also believed
that whoever so applies those propositions will arrive at the same
conclusions to which I have come; namely, that there is no valid
evidence, in any of the phenomena of so-called spiritism, that the
spirits of the dead have any part in their production. On the contrary,
as it seems to me, the evidence all points in the opposite direction. I
refer, of course, solely to those phenomena which are produced through
so-called spirit mediums. If there is any communication to be had with
the denizens of the other shore, it is certainly not through them. I
have reluctantly arrived at this conclusion. It would be pleasant to
believe otherwise, but I have sought in vain for evidence which would
warrant me in doing so.

In abandoning all hope of obtaining valid evidence of the ability of
disembodied spirits to hold intercourse with the living through the
intervention of spirit mediums, I do not for a moment yield my hope, or
my convictions, of a life beyond the grave. On the contrary, the very
powers which are evoked in the production of the phenomena constitute
one of the strongest links in the chain of evidence going to show that
man possesses within himself an entity which does not depend for its
existence upon the continued life of the body. We see that this entity
possesses powers which far transcend those of our physical frame;
that the mental powers of the subjective mind or entity are exercised
independently of our objective senses; that they grow stronger as the
body grows weaker, and are strongest in the hour of death. Have we not
a logical right to infer that when it is entirely freed from physical
trammels, it will have reached a condition of independent existence?
What that existence is, it is not for objective man to know. It is
possible that if spirits could communicate as familiarly with the
living as we commune with one another, they would have no language
which could bring to our comprehension their true condition. It would
be like teaching an infant the principles of the differential calculus.
How can the caterpillar, crawling upon the ground, hold intelligent
communion with the airy butterfly, or the butterfly reveal to the
caterpillar the mysteries of her winged life?

The fact remains that mankind has ever hoped, and will ever hope,
for a continued existence of some kind; and all the old arguments
in its favor, and all the promises of the Master, still hold good.
Moreover, every new development in psychic science adds strength to the
arguments, and fresh proofs of his wisdom.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 37: Book on Mediums, p. 87.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XX.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD.

    Ghosts.--Scientific Investigations.--Tentative
    Classification of Phenomena.--Power to create Phantasms
    demonstrated.--Investigations of the London Society for
    Psychical Research.--Spirit Photography.--Projection of the
    "Astral Body."--Witches.--Conditions necessary.--The same in
    all Cases.--Spirit "Materialization."--Magicians.--Ghosts
    the Creations of the Subjective Entity.--Eliphas Levi's
    Views.--Raising the Devil.--Crystal Visions.--Propositions
    established.--Embodied Thoughts.--Phantasms not Spirits.--Uniform
    Characteristics.--A New Classification.--Conditions of Objectivity
    and Persistency.--Haunted Houses.--No General Intelligence
    manifested.--D'Assier's Statements.--A Remarkable Case.--Ghosts
    Intensified Telepathic Visions.--Difference in Degree, not
    in Kind.--Ghosts not controllable by Suggestion.--Other
    Salient Peculiarities.--Ghosts neither prove nor disprove
    Immortality.--Mental Atmosphere of Houses.--Remarkable
    Cases.--Classification of Telepathic Phenomena.--Conclusions.


There is another class of phenomena which demands a brief notice,
although it does not pertain directly to the development of the
hypothesis under consideration. It is that of phantasms of the dead,
or ghosts. Scientific investigations of modern times have demonstrated
the fact that many of the ghost-stories which have terrified the timid
in all ages of the world have a real foundation in fact; that is,
it has been demonstrated that certain impalpable shapes, resembling
persons deceased, do from time to time appear to the living. The
world is indebted more than it can ever repay to the London Society
for Psychical Research for its patient, untiring, and strictly
scientific investigations of this subject. Many facts have been
accumulated, but they have not yet been classified with reference to
any special theory or hypothesis. It is perhaps too early to formulate
any hypothesis pertaining to the subject-matter. It is certainly too
early to dogmatize. The most that can safely be done is to speculate
tentatively, and to suggest a line of thought and investigation for
those who are devoting their time to the work. It is my purpose to
do this, and this alone, in the hope that if the suggestions seem
to be worthy of consideration, the subject may be pursued on the
lines indicated until their fallacy is exposed or their correctness
demonstrated.

It seems to me that sufficient facts have been accumulated to
establish, provisionally at least, certain definite characteristics of
all phantasms, whether of the living or the dead; and if a theory can
be formulated, however startling it may be at first glance, that will
harmonize with the well-established characteristics of the phenomena,
it will be at least worthy of consideration. In attempting to do this,
I shall not quote authorities to any extent to establish my premises,
but shall state merely what seems to be well authenticated, and leave
the verification of the premises, as well as the conclusions, to those
who have more time, patience, and ability to devote to the work than I
have.

First of all, then, it seems to be well authenticated that the
subjective personality of man possesses the power to create phantasms,
or visions, which in many instances are visible to the objective senses
of others. The telepathic experiments recorded in "Phantasms of the
Living" and in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research
amply demonstrate the truth of this proposition. Every vision perceived
by one in telepathic rapport with another must be presumed to have been
created by one or the other. It is true that some of the visions may
be merely perceived subjectively, but not all. Many cases are recorded
where the phantasms have been perceived by more than one person at the
same time, and others have been perceived under circumstances such
as to leave no doubt that the percipient was in a completely normal
condition, and saw the visions objectively. Moreover, the phenomena of
so-called spirit photography amply demonstrate the fact that visions
can be created of such tangible character that they can be caught and
fixed upon the photographic plate. In saying this I am not insensible
of the fact that many frauds have been committed in this species of
phenomena, as well as in all others attributed to spirits of the dead.
But this does not militate against phenomena of that character which
have been produced under test conditions so strict that all possibility
of fraud was eliminated. In admitting this class of phenomena to be
genuine, in the sense that it is sometimes produced without fraud or
legerdemain, it is also admitted that, in many instances, pictures of
the sitter's dead friends have been produced which were such perfect
likenesses of the deceased as to be unmistakable. Of course it will be
understood that whilst I admit the phenomenon, I do not admit the claim
that it has its origin in the spirit-world. Like all other so-called
spirit phenomena, it is, in my opinion, directly traceable to the power
of the subjective mind of the medium, aided by telepathic communion
with the sitter. The latter, consciously or unconsciously, thinks of
one or more of his dead friends. The medium, perceiving telepathically
the image created by the mind of the sitter, re-creates it in such
tangible shape that it is caught by the camera. Or it may be in some
instances that the image is created by the sitter himself in such
palpable shape as to be caught by the camera. Indeed, in many recorded
instances, where the sitter has been a powerful medium, it seems
probable that he created the image himself. In point of fact there is
little doubt that the power resides, to a greater or less extent, in
all human beings to create such images, their strength and clearness
depending, of course, upon the power of the individual to recall
vividly the remembrance of the person to be photographed, together with
the power to concentrate his mind for a certain length of time upon the
mental picture. Indeed, experiments have been made which demonstrate
the power to produce the picture of any one, living or dead, in this
manner.

This being true, two conclusions are obvious; namely, (1) That the
phenomena of spirit photography are easily accounted for, without the
necessity of attributing them to extramundane origin; and (2) That
the power resides in the subjective mind of man to create phantasms
perceptible to the objective senses of others. Again, it seems to be
well established by experiment that some persons have the power, not
only to create such phantasms, but to endow them with a certain degree
of intelligence and power. Thus, the experiments recorded in "Phantasms
of the Living," and quoted in a preceding chapter of this book, show
that the image of the agent was not only created by him in his sleep,
but was projected into the presence of others at a long distance from
where he slept. The image was not only perceptible to the sight, as
much so as the real presence would have been, but in some instances
it was even tangible. The Orientalists call this the "projection of
the astral body," and it is claimed that many persons in the East have
acquired the power to produce the phenomenon at will. The fact that
phantasms can thus be produced being well authenticated, many old
stories of such phenomena acquire a new interest and importance, and
assume an air of probability. Thus, the old stories of witches, in
so far as the alleged phenomena seem to have been produced under the
same conditions as those which are well authenticated, are elevated
into the region of possibility, if not of probability. They are at
least worthy of re-examination, in the light of modern experiments.
It is foreign to my purpose to enter at large into the discussion of
the alleged phenomena of so-called witchcraft, and this allusion is
made here for the purpose of suggesting to those who desire to pursue
the subject that if they will take for granted that which has been
demonstrated to be true in regard to the power of the sub-conscious
mind, or personality, to project tangible phantasms or images, and will
apply the doctrine of duality and suggestion to the alleged facts, the
old stories of the phenomena of witchcraft will be found to possess a
scientific value and importance which cannot be ignored in the study of
psychology.

For the purposes of this argument it will be assumed that the power of
man, under certain conditions, to project phantasms is provisionally
established. The next question is, What are the conditions? If we find
that the conditions are practically the same in all cases, one great
step in the classification of the phenomena will have been taken.

The one condition which seems to be necessary in all cases for the
production of the phenomena is that of profound sleep, either natural
or artificial. The objective senses must be locked in slumber, and
the more profound the sleep, the greater the power seems to be. Thus,
in the cases recorded in "Phantasms of the Living," the sleep was
natural, but profound. It was at least so profound that the agent had
no recollection of actually doing what he had resolved to do, and
it was only brought to his knowledge by the subsequent statements
made by the percipients. It is said, however, that sometimes the
agent retains full recollection of what he did. Be this as it may,
the fact remains that the one essential condition for the successful
production of the phenomena is that of sleep. Again, the Orientalists
tell us the same thing. Their adepts lock themselves in their rooms,
which are carefully protected against invasion, and go into a sleep
so profound as to simulate death. The witches were known to employ
artificial means to produce sleep. Formul� for producing what was
known as "witches' ointment" are still extant. It was composed of the
most powerful narcotics, made into an ointment by the addition of some
fatty substance. The body of the witch was anointed from head to foot,
and she then went to bed in some place secure from observation or
disturbance, and lapsed into a profound sleep. This much is known, and
many wonderful phenomena are alleged to have been produced, prominent
among which was the creation of various shapes, such as the image of
herself, images of cats, dogs, wolves, etc., which were sent to worry
and annoy her neighbors or any one against whom she had a grudge. In
fact, the shapes alleged to have been produced are protean.

Another alleged phenomenon of cognate character is that of so-called
spirit materialization. In the production of this phenomenon the
conditions are the same. The medium goes into a trance, or hypnotic
state, and projects the shapes of various persons, generally of the
deceased friends of some of those present. A good medium will produce
any number of visions, of any number of persons, men and women, large
and small. Spiritists believe, of course, that the real spirits of
their friends are present, and are thus made visible to mortal eyes,
and in many instances tangible, and able to hold a brief conversation
with their friends. As the intellectual part of the performance of
these alleged spirits is always on a par with that of other forms of
spirit manifestation, subject to the same limitations and governed by
the same laws, we must come to the same conclusion as to their origin,
namely, that, whatever it may be, it is not due to spirits of the dead.

The old stories of the power of magicians to conjure alleged spirits
are also raised into the region of probability by these considerations.
They also observed the same conditions required in all the other cases
mentioned. By the performance of certain impressive ceremonies, which
they were taught to believe were necessary, they were said to be able
to evoke so-called spirits and to do many other wonderful things. The
ceremonies and incantations, together with the impressive environment
with which they surrounded themselves, the incense, the slow music, the
"dim religious light," the solemn invocations,--all had a tendency to
throw them into the subjective condition, and thus enable them to evoke
the shapes desired. That these shapes were literal creations of the
subjective personality of the magician, rather than the actual spirits
invoked, there is every reason to believe. Nor are we alone in that
opinion. Eliphas Levi, than whom no modern writer on the subject of
magic is better informed or more honest in the expression of his real
convictions, gives utterance to the following:--

    "Human thought creates what it imagines; the phantoms of
    superstition project their real deformity in the Astral Light, and
    live by the very terrors they produce. They owe their being to the
    delusions of imagination and to the aberration of the senses, and
    are never produced in the presence of any one who knows and can
    expose the mystery of their monstrous birth."[38]

Again, on page 160, he says:--

    "The evokers of the Devil must before all things belong to a
    religion which believes in a Devil who is the rival of God. To have
    recourse to a power, we must believe in it. A firm faith being
    therefore granted in the religion of Satan, here is the method of
    communicating with this pseudo-god:--

            _Magical Axiom._

  Within the circle of its action, every Logos creates what it affirms.

            _Direct Consequence._

  He who affirms the Devil creates the Devil."

The author then goes on to give minute directions for performing
the ceremonies necessary for raising the Devil, so to speak, with
which we have nothing to do at present; these quotations being
made merely for the purpose of showing that the greatest and most
philosophical magician of this century was fully aware that the shapes
evoked by the Magi, whether they be of angels or of demons, whether
they be perceptible to the objective senses or merely subjective
hallucinations, tangible or intangible, are the creations of the mind
of the magician.

The phenomenon of crystal vision is another illustration of the power
of the subjective mind to create visions. Ordinarily these visions
are only perceptible to the operator; but cases are recorded where
they were perfectly perceptible to the bystanders. The conditions
necessary for successful crystal reading are practically the same as in
all other cases, although the subjective condition is not ordinarily
so pronounced. This phenomenon illustrates, however, the power of
the subjective mind to create phantasms, and constitutes one of the
many methods of bringing the operations of the subjective mind above
the threshold of consciousness. It is one of the best methods known
of exercising the power of telepathy, the visions being objective
reproductions of what is real or perceived in the mind of the person
who consults the medium. If no one is present besides the medium or
operator, he sees merely what his own subjective mind creates. It is
perhaps superfluous to remark that the phenomenon is governed by the
same laws which pertain to all other subjective phenomena, and the
intelligence displayed is hedged about by the same limitations.

I have now enumerated several different sub-classes of the phenomena
which are concerned in the creation of visions. In each sub-class
instances are recorded of the visions being made perceptible to
the objective senses of others. As remarked in the beginning of
this chapter, we do not propose to stop to verify the phenomena of
each class. It is sufficient to know that the phenomena of one of
the sub-classes is verified by scientific authority. For present
purposes the rest must stand or fall by that. At any rate, we shall
assume the right to hold that any cognate phenomenon, alleged to have
been produced under the same conditions as those which have been
demonstrated to be veridical, is entitled to tentative consideration
and credit.

It is assumed, therefore, that the following propositions are
sufficiently verified for the purpose of formulating a definite theory
of proximate causation:--

1. The alleged phenomena are all produced under the same conditions.

2. The one essential condition is that of the partial or total
suspension of objective consciousness.

3. The more complete the extinction of the objective consciousness,
the more pronounced the success of the experiment; that is, the more
tangible to the objective senses of others do the creations become.

From these facts it is fair to conclude,--

1. That the power to create phantasms resides and is inherent in the
subjective mind, or personality, of man.

2. That the power becomes greater as the body approaches nearer to the
condition of death; that is, as the subjective, or hypnotic, condition
becomes deeper, and the subjective personality in consequence becomes
stronger in its sphere of activity.

3. That at the hour of death, or when the functions of the body are
entirely suspended, the power is greatest.

Hence, ghosts.

It will be understood from the foregoing that my theory is that ghosts,
or phantasms of the dead, are produced exactly as phantasms of the
living are produced; that is, they are creations of the subjective
entity. How they are created is of course a question that may never
be answered in terms comprehensible by the objective intelligence of
man. It is as far beyond our finite comprehension as are the processes
by which the Infinite Mind has brought the universe into being. All
that we can know is the fact that phantasms are created by some power
inherent in the subjective personality of man. They may be called
"embodied thoughts," as man may be called the embodied thought of God.
If, as the Scriptures teach us, "we are gods," that is, "sons of God"
and "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ," it is fair to
presume that that part of the Infinite which is embodied in each of us
must partake, to a limited extent, of His power to create. Experimental
psychology suggests to us that we have that power, and that it is thus
that phantasms are produced.

To the supposition that phantasms of the dead are thus created is
opposed but one other hypothesis, and that is, that the phantasms are
the real spirits of the dead persons whom they represent. Granted
that ghosts do exist and make themselves manifest to the living,
one or the other of these hypotheses must be true, and the other
false. To determine which is true, we must have recourse to the
ghosts themselves; that is, we must collate the facts regarding the
characteristics of these supposed dwellers on the border-land, and ask
ourselves whether their known and admitted characteristics are those
which would naturally belong to the real spirit of a man, or to an
embodied thought of a man.

The salient characteristics which seem to belong to all ghosts, and
which pertain to the question under consideration, are these:--

The ghosts which are best authenticated and which seem to possess the
greatest longevity, so to speak,--that is, the greatest persistency of
power and purpose,--are of those who have died violent deaths. There
are exceptions to this rule, which will be noted later on.

The generally accepted theory which has been employed to account for
this coincidence is that the soul, thus torn suddenly and prematurely
from the body, retains more of the material elements of the body than
it does when death is the result of gradual disintegration and the
natural separation of the material from the immaterial. It is thought
that the physical elements thus retained temporarily by the spirit
enable it to make itself visible to the living, as well as to perform
certain feats of physical strength attributed to some spirits. This
is very plausible at first glance, and in the absence of any facts
to the contrary might be accepted as the true theory. But, as before
intimated, there are exceptions to the supposed rule. It is not true
that all ghosts are those of persons who have died violent deaths. On
the contrary, many of the best authenticated ghosts are of persons who
have died at a good old age and in the due course of nature. Moreover,
there is nothing to distinguish the one class of ghosts from the other,
although it is true that those who have met death by violence far
outnumber the others. This theory, therefore, accounts for nothing.
Nevertheless, the fact that the majority of ghosts are of those who
belong to a particular class must possess some significance. Now, if we
can discover some state of facts which appears to accompany all, or to
precede all, ghostly phenomena, a great point will be gained, and the
real significance of the other facts may become apparent.

In looking the field over with this end in view, the first fact which
forces itself upon our attention, and which seems to be universal and
to possess a veritable significance, is that _all phantasms of the dead
are of those who have died under circumstances of great mental stress
or emotion_. No one whose death was peaceful and quiet, no one who left
this life with no unsatisfied longing or desire present in the mind at
the time of death, ever projected a phantasm upon the living objective
world.

Again, the strength, persistency, and objectivity of the phantasm seem
to be in exact proportion to the intensity of the emotion experienced
at the moment of death.

It will thus be apparent why it happens that ghosts of those who have
died violent deaths more frequently "revisit the glimpses of the moon"
than those whose deaths have been less tragic and less calculated to
inspire an intense desire or emotion. The murdered man feels, at the
supreme moment, an intense longing to acquaint the world with the
circumstances of his "taking off;" and he conceives the thought of
reproducing the scene on the spot until its significance is understood
and the murderer is brought to justice. The result is a haunted house;
and those whose nerves are strong enough to withstand the shock may
nightly witness a realistic reproduction of the tragedy. This may
continue for days, months, or even years, but invariably ceases when
the object is accomplished.

The character of the manifestations is as varied as are the phases
of human emotion or the objects of human desire; but when the facts
of a tragedy once come to light, the phantasm is always found to be
significant of their important features.

When a mother dies at a distance from her children, she is often filled
with an intense longing to see them once more before she passes away.
The result often is that she projects a phantasm into their presence
which takes a lingering look into the faces of the loved ones, and then
fades away.

Two persons agree that whichever passes away first shall show himself
to the other at or soon after the hour of death. The result often is
that the agreement is carried out with startling fidelity. The object
accomplished, the phantasm disappears forever.

Another salient characteristic, which seems to be universal and which
possesses the utmost interest and importance in determining the true
source of the phantasm, is that it possesses no general intelligence.
That is to say, a ghost was never known to have more than one idea or
purpose. That one idea or purpose it will follow with the greatest
pertinacity, but utterly ignores everything else. In the rare instances
where the phantasm has been conversed with, it manifests perfect
intelligence on the one subject, but pays not the slightest attention
to any question pertaining to any other, not even to cognate subjects.
This characteristic pertains to every form and phase of visions which
are tangible to the objective senses. Subjective hallucinations are
governed by different laws, and are not taken into account in this
connection.

M. Adolphe d'Assier, in his intensely interesting work entitled
"Posthumous Humanity," mentions this peculiarity in a number of
instances. Thus, on page 272 he says:

    "The shade only talks about its personal predilections, and remains
    deaf to every question outside the limits it has prescribed for
    itself. All the colloquies that have been gathered upon this
    subject resemble that of Bezuel and Desfontaine (1697), reported
    by Dr. Bri�re de Boismont. They were two college comrades, two
    intimate friends, who had sworn to each other that the first
    who died should appear to the other to give him some news about
    himself."

Accordingly, the year following, the shade of Desfontaine appeared to
Bezuel, and addressed him as follows:--

    "I agreed with you that if I died first I should come and tell
    you. I was drowned in the Caen River the day before yesterday, at
    this same hour, in company of Such and Such;' and he related the
    circumstances which caused his death. 'It was his very voice,' says
    Bezuel. 'He requested me, when his brother should return, to tell
    him certain things to be communicated to his father and mother. He
    gave me other commissions, then bade me farewell and disappeared.
    I soon learned that everything he had told me was but too true,
    and I was able to verify some details that he had given. In our
    conversation he refused to answer all the questions I put to him
    as to his actual situation, especially whether he was in heaven,
    in hell, or in purgatory. One would have said that he did not hear
    me when I put such questions, and he persisted in talking to me of
    that which was upon his mind about his brother, his family, or the
    circumstances which had preceded his death.'"

It should be stated, in this connection, that this phantom does not
appear to have been seen objectively by any one, save, possibly, by
Bezuel himself. Others were present, who saw Bezuel apparently engaged
in conversation with some invisible being. They could hear Bezuel's
words, but neither saw nor heard those of the phantom. It seems
probable, therefore, that it was a case of telepathic communion pure
and simple; but it illustrates our point just as well as if it had been
what it appeared to Bezuel to be,--a veritable apparition, perceptible
to the objective senses. Moreover, it was a case of deferred
percipience,--the death having occurred two days previously,--and is
therefore more strongly illustrative of our position, as will presently
be seen.

A moment's reflection will show how impossible it would be for the
agent, in conveying a telepathic message on a given subject, especially
in a case of deferred percipience, to do anything more than convey the
message. When the agent has sent the message, the transaction is ended,
so far as he is concerned. When the message rises above the threshold
of the consciousness of the percipient, and he begins to ask questions
foreign to the subject of the message, there is no one to answer them;
the agent is no longer in telepathic rapport with him. It is just the
same as if one should send a telegram to another on a given subject,
and then disappear. The recipient of a message might ask all the
questions he chose, on that or any other subject, but he could get no
reply, for the reason that the original sender is out of reach.

It might be possible, if both the agent and the percipient were in the
proper mental condition at the same time, for them to hold a general
conversation; but we know of no recorded case of the kind. In all
reported cases the agent telepaths the message, and the percipient
takes cognizance of it by means of clairaudience, or by seeing a
vision illustrating it, as the case may be, and that ends it. The
message is a thought of the agent projected into the consciousness of
the percipient through the medium of his subjective mind. When the
message has once risen into the consciousness of the percipient, he
is apparently no longer in a mental condition to communicate with the
agent telepathically. At least, he never does so communicate, with the
result of receiving further information in reply.

In the case under consideration the agent had been dead two days when
the message was received by the percipient. If it was a telepathic
message projected at the hour of death by the agent, it was manifestly
impossible, for the reasons before stated, for him to respond to
questions foreign to the subject of the message. If, on the other hand,
the apparition was the real phantom, or spirit, of the deceased, it
could have conveyed any information desired. The fact that it could
not do so shows conclusively that said phantom was merely the embodied
thought of the deceased, projected at the supreme moment for a specific
purpose.

M. d'Assier affirms that the case here related is typical of all
messages delivered by ghosts; that is, that they are apparently never
able to enter into a general discussion of matters outside of the
one dominant idea which called them into being. The history of all
phantoms, so far as our reading extends, confirms the statement.

From these premises two conclusions seem inevitable:

1. That a phantom, whether it be of the living or of the dead, whether
it is perceived subjectively or objectively, is not the subjective
entity, or soul, of the person it represents. If it were, it would
necessarily possess all the intelligence belonging to that person,
and would, consequently, be able and willing to answer any and all
questions propounded by the percipient. It is simply impossible to
conceive any valid reason for the refusal of a friend or relative of
the percipient to answer questions of vital interest and importance to
all mankind.

2. The second conclusion is, that a phantom, or ghost, is nothing more
or less than an intensified telepathic vision, its objectivity, power,
persistency, and permanence being in exact proportion to the intensity
of the emotion and desire which called it into being. It is the
embodiment of an idea or thought. It is endowed with the intelligence
pertaining to that one thought, and no more. Hence the astonishing
limitations of the intelligence of ghosts, before noted.

The difference between a telepathic vision transmitted from one living
man to another, and a phantom, or ghost, of a deceased person, is one
of degree, and not of kind; of species, but not of genus. Both are
creations of the subjective mind; both are created for the purpose of
conveying intelligence to others. In each case the vision ceases the
moment the object of its creation is accomplished. In telepathy between
two living persons, the vision is created, and the intelligence is
communicated direct to the percipient. Its mission accomplished, it
fades away. It seldom displays physical power or becomes perceptible to
the touch, although there are exceptions to the rule. (See the cases
noted in a former chapter.) The reasons are: (1) that the emotions
and desires which call it into being are seldom of great intensity,
compared with the emotions of a man dying by violence; (2) that the
conditions are not so favorable in a living person, in normal health,
as they are in one whose objective senses are being closed in death;
(3) that the object for which it was created being easily and quickly
accomplished, and there being no further reason for its existence, it
fades away, in accordance with the laws of its being.

On the other hand, the phantom of the dead is produced under the
most favorable conditions. The objective senses are being closed in
death. The emotions attending a death by violence are necessarily of
the most intense character. The desire to acquaint the world with
the circumstances attending the tragedy is overwhelming. The message
is not for a single individual, but to all whom it may concern.
Hence the ghost does not travel from place to place, and show itself
promiscuously, but confines its operations to the locality, and
generally to the room in which the death-scene occurred. There it will
remain, nightly rehearsing the tragedy, for days and months and years,
or until some one with nerves strong enough demands to know the object
of its quest. When this is done, the information will be given, and
then the phantom will fade away forever.

We have supposed two extreme cases,--one, a simple case of experimental
telepathy, and one, of a death by violence. Between the two extremes
there is every variety of manifestation and every grade of power. But
they are all governed by the same laws and limitations.

That the posthumous phantom is not the soul, or subjective entity, of
the deceased, is evidenced by many other facts, among which may be
mentioned the following:--

1. It is not controllable by suggestion. This is abundantly shown by
what has been said regarding its persistency in following the one idea
which it represents, and ignoring every effort to obtain information
pertaining to other matters. This peculiarity characterizes every
phantasm, whether of the living or of the dead. Again, no ghost was
ever laid by the power of exorcism until the object of its existence
was accomplished. Obsessing spirits, so-called, can be exorcised,
because the exorcist is dealing directly with the subjective mind of
the obsessed, and amenability to control by suggestion is the law
of its being. But a ghost is not amenable to that law; it cannot
be scolded out of existence before the object of its existence has
been accomplished. In this, therefore, the phantom possesses the
characteristics which might be expected to distinguish an embodied
thought of a soul from the soul itself.

2. If we are to suppose a phantom to be the soul of the person it
represents, we must also be prepared to believe that inanimate things
and animals possess souls. Ghosts, it will be remembered, are always
well provided with wearing apparel. We must therefore suppose clothes
to have souls, and that the soul of the dead, or dying, man provides
himself with an outfit of the souls of his hat, coat, trousers, boots,
etc. Moreover, ghosts are frequently seen riding in ghostly turnouts,
comprising horses, carriage, harness, and all the paraphernalia of a
first-class establishment. Are we to suppose that the souls of all
these things are pressed into the service of the nocturnal visitant?
The same is true of telepathic visions of all grades and kinds. In
this, again, the vision, or phantom, possesses the characteristics
which one can easily attribute to an embodied thought-creation, but not
to the actual soul of a person, living or dead.

3. Another peculiarity of ghosts is that they invariably disappear,
never to return, when the building which was the scene of their
visitation has been destroyed. Another building may be erected on the
same spot, but the ghost never reappears. There must be some valid
reason for this, for it is impossible to attribute to coincidence
that which so frequently and invariably happens. It would seem to be
but another limitation of the power and intelligence of the embodied
thought. Its mission seems to be confined, not only to conveying the
one item of intelligence, but to the actual scene of the tragedy.
The effect of changing the physical environment appears to have the
same effect as an attempt to change the current of its thought by
asking a question foreign to it. It disappears. Now, it is impossible
to conceive of an intelligent entity, in full possession of all the
faculties and attributes of a human soul, being so easily diverted from
the pursuit of a given object.

4. M. d'Assier arrives at two conclusions regarding ghosts, neither
of which can afford any satisfaction to those who seek, in their
manifestations, for evidence of a happy or a continued life beyond
the grave. One is that the continued existence of the shade is a
burden too grievous to be borne; and the other is that it eventually
disappears by atomic dispersion, and loses its identity. On page 270 of
"Posthumous Humanity" he says:--

    "Most of the manifestations by which the shades reveal themselves
    seem to indicate that the posthumous existence is a burden."

Again, on page 273, he says:--

    "To sum up, one may say that the impression left upon the mind by
    the lamentations and rare replies of those shades who succeed in
    making themselves heard is almost always a sentiment of profound
    sadness."

On page 274 he has the following to say regarding the ultimate fate of
posthumous man:--

    "I have said that the existence of the shade is but a brief one.
    Its tissue disintegrates readily under the action of the physical,
    chemical, and atmospheric forces which constantly assail it,
    and it re-enters, molecule by molecule, the universal planetary
    medium. Occasionally, however, it resists these destructive causes,
    continuing its struggle for existence beyond the tomb."

M. d'Assier is undoubtedly right regarding his facts, but wrong in
his interpretation of those facts, and consequently wrong in his
conclusions.

It is undoubtedly true that the shade is always imbued with a sentiment
of profound sadness. The circumstances under which it is produced, and
the emotions and desires which call it into being, are necessarily of
such a character as to project a profoundly sad thought. And this fact
is another evidence of its being an embodied thought, rather than a
human soul. If it were the latter, it would be subject to varying moods
and emotions, modified by its environment for the time being. But,
being an embodied thought, it never changes its attitude or sentiment,
but goes on in its predetermined line of action, regardless of its
surroundings and utterly oblivious of anything which may be said or
done to divert it. Truly, "thoughts are things."

Again, M. d'Assier is right in his declaration that the shade
sustains but a comparatively brief existence. Some ghosts persist for
years, it is true, in haunting a given spot, but they all eventually
disintegrate. Their capacity for continued existence depends upon the
intensity of the emotion which produces them. Their actual longevity
depends largely upon the importance of the thought or message which
they personate. It depends principally, however, upon the successful
performance of its mission. When that is accomplished, it disappears
at once and forever. As has already been pointed out, an ordinary
telepathic message between two individuals disappears at once upon
its successful delivery; whereas a phantom of the dead may persist in
haunting one spot for years. It will, however, eventually disintegrate
and disappear, even if its mission has proved to be a failure.

If we are to consider, as M. d'Assier evidently does, the shade of a
deceased person to be the soul of such person, we must arrive at the
same conclusion that he has reached; namely, that posthumous existence
is a burden, and that it is but a brief one at most. According to his
view, the evidence of the phantom negatives the idea of a continued
existence after the death of the body. According to our view, it
neither proves nor disproves immortality; it leaves that question just
where it found it. Like all so-called spiritual manifestations, it adds
nothing to our stock of knowledge of what is in store for us beyond the
grave. We must still look for immortality with the eye of faith alone,
relying on the promises of the Master.

There is another alleged phenomenon connected with this general subject
which deserves a passing notice. I refer to the popular belief that
certain houses are pervaded by a mental atmosphere, so to speak, which
corresponds to the mental condition of those who have inhabited it.
There are many sensitive persons who, upon moving into a strange house
or room, are influenced apparently by the mental attitude of those who
previously occupied the premises. This is especially true if the former
inhabitants were the victims of any great sorrow or strong emotion of
any kind whatever. The influence is felt sometimes for years, and is
frequently of such a character and force as to compel the victim to
vacate the premises. No ghost is seen or heard, but the influence is
felt, and cannot be thrown off. Doubtless many such experiences may
be attributed to suggestion,--the person having been informed of some
tragic event which once happened on the premises. But many cases are
recorded which cannot be thus explained. Cases are numerous where the
percipient knew nothing whatever of the history of the house or of its
former inhabitants.

The phenomenon is explained by spiritists by referring it to the
agency of spirits of the dead. Others explain it on the theory of
psychometry. That the latter explanation is not the true one is
evidenced by the fact that psychometry itself is explicable on the
well-known principles of telepathy. That the spirit hypothesis is
not the true one is evidenced by the fact that the influence is felt
when there has been no death on the premises,--when all the former
inhabitants of the house are still alive. Nor is the influence
necessarily a bad one. Thus, a lady of my acquaintance, who is
peculiarly sensitive to psychic impressions, informs me that in one
house, which she occupied some years ago, she was seized with an
intense longing to study art. She had passed the age at which people
usually take up a new profession, and she had never been particularly
interested in art. She had no acquaintances who were artists, and there
was nothing in her environment specially to attract her attention
to the subject. Nevertheless, her desire to become an artist grew
stronger and stronger, until she felt forced to yield. She finally
employed a teacher, and eventually became very proficient. It was
afterwards ascertained that the tenant who occupied the house before
she took possession was an enthusiastic devotee of art. He was not
a particularly good artist, but his whole soul was bound up in his
profession.

The same lady occupied a house some years later which she felt obliged
to leave, on account of the evil influence which it seemed to exert
upon her. It was an almost ideal house in its appointments and in
the arrangement of its rooms; and when she first entered it she was
enthusiastic in her admiration of it. But she never spent a comfortable
day in that house. Naturally of a cheerful and happy disposition, she
became gloomy and despondent, without any apparent cause, and was
at last forced to yield to her feelings and vacate the premises. An
inquiry into the history of the house revealed the fact that it had
formerly been occupied by a lady whose husband had ill-treated her, and
had finally deserted her, under circumstances of peculiar atrocity,
to live with a mistress. The history of that house from the time when
the afflicted lady left it has been one of constant change of tenants.
Other houses in the same row, built upon the same plan and owned by
the same person, have no such history. No death has ever occurred in
the house, either tragic or otherwise, and consequently it cannot be
said to be haunted in the ordinary acceptation of the term; that is, by
spirits of the dead.

But is it not haunted, nevertheless? Is it not haunted by the thoughts
engendered from the mental agony of that poor woman whose life
was blasted by the perfidy of an unfaithful husband,--a man whose
subsequent career was one of disgrace and infamy?

I make these suggestions tentatively, and for the purpose of directing
the attention of those interested to a line of investigation which
should not be ignored by students of the new psychology. It is cognate
with the phenomenon of haunted houses, and may yet be found to be
governed by the same laws. If it is true that a visible ghost is
but an embodied thought of a dying man, may it not be true that any
great emotion can leave its impress upon the locality in which it is
experienced? It may not be visible to the objective senses, but it may
have the power to impress the subjective minds of those who are brought
within its environment, and to create in them the same emotions as
those experienced by the former occupants of the premises. It seems to
be another form of telepathy, cognate with the phantom of the dead,
differing only in the strength and character of its manifestation. It
may not be visible, for the reason that the thought cannot be pictured
by a vision. It may be an abstract thought, idea, or emotion, which
can be transmitted to others by impression only; or the emotion which
created it may not have been strong enough to project a visible phantom.

Telepathy, therefore, appears to be divisible into three generic
classes, differing principally in the methods or means of
percipience,--the processes of projection being the same in all.

The first is a thought sent from one living person to another for the
purpose of communicating information to that one individual. It is
perceived by that person only,--usually by means of visions,--and it
instantly fades away when its mission is accomplished.

The second is a thought sent from a dying person to the world at
large to communicate some fact of portentous import. It is sometimes
made visible to the objective senses, and is always confined to one
locality, which it haunts till its object is accomplished.

The third partakes of the characteristics of the first and second. It
is created by a living person, and is confined to one locality. It is
not sent to any particular individual, but impresses whoever inhabits
the house or room it haunts.

It will be understood by the intelligent reader that these three
classes are not separated by any distinct lines of demarcation, but
that each possesses characteristics common to the others.

In concluding this branch of the subject we have but one further remark
to make concerning those hypothetical spirits which are popularly
believed to be able to make themselves visible to mortal eyes. If
it is true that the power exists in mankind to create phantoms, to
project visions which may become visible to others, objectively or
subjectively, we have the logical right to infer that all so-called
spirits, such as elementals, elementaries, _et id genus omne_, are
creations of the subjective minds of those who believe in their
existence.

As remarked in beginning this chapter, it is written tentatively,
hoping to suggest an enlargement of the field of investigation of
the subject of telepathy. That power has been found to afford an
explanation of so much of psychic phenomena which had before been
referred to extramundane origin that it seems probable that it may be
capable of still further service in that direction. The phenomena of
ghosts and haunted houses seem to be the only demonstrated phenomena
of which telepathy has not been shown to be at least a partial
explanation; and if it can be shown that ghosts are also the creations
of subjective power, there will be nothing left for superstition to
fright the world withal.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 38: Eliphas Levi: Waite's Digest, p. 118.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI.

SUSPENDED ANIMATION AND PREMATURE BURIAL.

    Facts of Startling Import.--The Case of Washington
    Irving Bishop.--Other Instances of Suspended
    Animation.--Vampirism.--Catalepsy.--East Indian Fakirs buried
    alive for Months.--Fundamental Errors.--Catalepsy not a
    Disease.--A Recuperative Agent.--The Law of Suggestion governs
    the Phenomena.--Subjective Insensibility impossible.--Suggestion
    of Death deepens the Lethargy.--The Appalling Dangers of
    Catalepsy.--The Proper Treatment.


There is another psychic phenomenon which deserves a passing notice at
our hands, not only because it is governed by the same laws which have
been discussed, but because it is a matter of transcendent practical
interest and importance. I refer to the subject of suspended animation,
and consequent premature burial.

I know of but one physician in this country who has given serious
attention to this subject. Nothing in authoritative form has yet
appeared from his pen, but I am credibly informed that he has collected
an array of facts of veritable significance. One assertion of startling
import is that in the United States an average of not less than one
case a week is discovered and reported. This statement alone attests
the importance of the subject, although due allowance must be made for
possible exaggeration. Be that as it may, the appalling possibility of
premature burial as a result of a condition so common as catalepsy,
the psychic aspects of which are so little understood in this country,
invests the subject with more than ordinary interest.

The following cases have been personally investigated by the writer,
and serve to illustrate the dangers which menace the cataleptic
subject. Names are omitted, at the request of the parties interested.

The first case is that of a young lady, near Indianapolis, who came
to life after fourteen days of suspended animation. Six doctors had
applied the usual tests, and pronounced her dead. Her little brother
clung to her, against the opinion of the doctors and the will of
the parents, and frantically declared that she was not dead. In the
excitement the bandage which held her jaw in place was accidentally
pushed aside. The jaw fell, and the brother fancied that he saw his
sister's tongue moving slowly.

"What do you want, sister?" cried the little fellow.

"Water," was the faint answer from the supposed corpse.

Water was administered, the patient revived, and is yet living.

A lady who is now at the head of one of the largest orphan asylums
of a Western city has been twice pronounced dead by the attending
physicians, twice prepared for the grave, and twice resuscitated by her
friends. On the last occasion extraordinary precautions were taken, in
view of her former experience. All the tests known to her physicians
were applied, and all doubts were set at rest. She was a second time
professionally declared to be dead, and the physicians left the house.
In preparing the body for burial it was accidentally pricked by a pin.
Soon afterwards it was discovered that a small drop of blood marked
the spot where the pin entered. This once more roused the hope of the
family, and vigorous treatment soon restored her to consciousness. She
is living to-day, a vigorous, useful woman. It is proper to note here
that upon being restored, the lady declared that she had never for a
moment lost consciousness, that she knew all that went on around her,
perfectly comprehended the significance of all the tests which were
applied, but felt the utmost indifference as to the result, and was
neither surprised nor alarmed when it was decided that she was dead.

A few years ago, a gentleman of Harrisburg, Pa., apparently died after
a long period of suffering from inflammatory rheumatism, complicated
with heart trouble. Preparations were made for the funeral; but his
wife refused to allow the body to be packed in ice, fearing the
possibility of a premature burial, and announced her determination
to keep it for at least a week. The next day her hopes were realized
by finding her husband with his eyes wide open, and one of his arms
out of the position in which it had been placed. She called loudly
for him to arise, and with assistance he did so, and was placed in a
chair. Physicians were summoned, but before their arrival he was so
far recovered that their aid was unnecessary, and he soon recovered
from his illness. He states that during the time of suspended animation
he was perfectly cognizant of all that occurred around him, heard the
lamentations of the stricken family and the preparations for burial,
but was unable to move a muscle or utter a sound.

The reading public has not forgotten the death of Washington Irving
Bishop, the celebrated mind-reader, which occurred under circumstances
that called forth the declaration on the part of his friends and
relatives that he was not dead before the surgeon's knife penetrated
his brain; that on several previous occasions he had been in a
cataleptic state, resembling death, for many hours at a time; and that
on one of these occasions his attending physicians had pronounced
him dead. The public will not soon forget the thrill of horror which
was felt when it was learned with what unseemly haste an autopsy was
performed upon that unfortunate man.

These are not exceptional cases, nor is the phenomenon of modern
origin. It can be traced back through all the ages of which there are
records preserved, until it is lost in the twilight of tradition and
fable.

In all human probability the ancient belief in vampirism had its origin
in discovered cases of suspended animation. It will be remembered
that whenever a corpse was suspected of being a vampire, the grave
was opened and the body was examined. If it showed no signs of
decomposition, the fact was held to be indubitable evidence of guilt.
The punishment was summary, and fully as effective as a modern autopsy;
it consisted in driving a stake through the heart. This simple process
effectually laid the "vampire ghost," and it no longer possessed the
power to "suck the blood of the living," and thus "continue to live
on in the grave," to use the language of an ancient official document
defining the characteristics of a vampire.

Revolting and gross as was the superstition relating to vampirism,
is it not possible that, like most legendary tales, it had a basis
of truth, and that an essential part of that truth consisted, as
before remarked, of the fact that the cases referred to were cases of
suspended animation? Many cases are reported which appear to be well
authenticated, and they all seem to sustain this theory. One case
(which was officially attested) is related, where the body of a man
suspected of vampirism was exhumed after it had lain in the grave three
weeks. No signs of decomposition being visible, a stake was driven
through the heart, "upon which," says the report, "fresh blood gushed
from the mouth and ears."

Another case is mentioned of one Arnold Paul, a Hungarian, whose body
was exhumed after it had been buried forty days. "His body," says the
narrator, "was red; his hair, nails, and beard had grown again, and
his veins were replete with fluid blood." The stake was brought into
requisition, and as it pierced his heart, he "uttered a frightful
shriek, as if he had been alive."

Two erroneous impressions very generally prevail regarding catalepsy,
or suspended animation. One is that depriving the subject of air will
cause death in a few hours. Another is that catalepsy is a disease, or
is always the result of disease. Both of these hypotheses are clearly
disproved by the well-known experiments of the East Indian fakirs.

One of the most clearly attested instances of the kind alluded to is
the experiment of the Fakir of Lahore, who, at the instance of Runjeet
Singh, suffered himself to be buried alive in an air-tight vault for
a period of six weeks. This case was thoroughly authenticated by Sir
Claude Wade, the then British Resident at the court of Loodhiana.
The fakir's nostrils and ears were first filled with wax; he was
then placed in a linen bag, then deposited in a wooden box which was
securely locked, and the box was deposited in a brick vault which was
carefully plastered up with mortar and sealed with the Rajah's seal. A
guard of British soldiers was then detailed to watch the vault day and
night. At the end of the prescribed time the vault was opened in the
presence of Sir Claude and Runjeet Singh, and the fakir was restored to
consciousness.

Lieutenant Boileau relates another instance where a man suffered
himself to be buried for a period of ten days in a grave lined with
masonry and covered with a large slab of stone, the whole strictly
guarded day and night. On being restored to consciousness, the man
offered to submit to burial for a year, if the lieutenant so desired.

Many other well-authenticated instances are related by British
residents in India, but these must suffice. In all these cases the
subjects were in perfect health when the experiments were made, and in
each instance the body, when disinterred, was found to present all the
characteristics indicating death, except decomposition.

Volumes might be filled with well-authenticated cases of suspended
animation, varying in duration from a few hours to many months; but it
would be foreign to the purpose of this chapter to cite any. Sufficient
instances have been given to illustrate the points which I shall
attempt to make, as well as to show the intrinsic importance of the
subject and the danger to be apprehended from ignorance of the psychic
principles involved.

The fundamental error into which many physicians have fallen consists
in the assumption that catalepsy is, _per se_, a disease. It must be
said, however, to the credit of the profession, that no one pretends to
understand it. Most medical writers confess that if it is a disease,
it is one of which the pathology is but little understood by the
profession, and they aver that morbid anatomy throws no light upon it
whatever. In fact, some well-known writers have doubted its existence,
and have attributed the recorded cases to gross imposture. It is,
however, generally held to be a functional nervous disorder; but the
tendency of modern investigation is in the direction of its psychic
aspects, and moral means are now largely employed in its treatment by
the best physicians.

The truth appears to be that catalepsy is not a disease in any proper
sense of the word. The most that can be said is that it may be
considered a symptom of certain diseases. That is to say, inasmuch
as it commonly attacks those who are suffering from certain nervous
disorders, it might be said to be a symptom indicating the presence of
such disorders. But, I repeat, it is not a disease _per se_; and one
prominent medical authority goes so far as to admit that "in itself
catalepsy is never fatal." He might have gone further, and said that
other diseases are rarely fatal when catalepsy supervenes.

Catalepsy belongs exclusively to the domain of hypnotism. I employ this
term in the broadest significance of its Greek radix; for no matter how
the condition is induced, it is purely a sleep of the objective senses,
a suspension of the vital functions, a rest of all the vital organs. It
can be induced in perfectly healthy persons by the hypnotic processes
on the one hand, or, on the other, it may supervene after a long period
of illness or nervous exhaustion. In both cases the phenomenon is
the same; and when the patient is intelligently treated, the effect
is always salutary. It is, in the highest sense of the phrase, a
manifestation of the _vis conservatrix natur�_; it is, of a truth,
"tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep."

Catalepsy is always easily induced in a hypnotic subject by the
ordinary processes known to hypnotists, and the normal condition is as
easily restored. It is always refreshing to the subject, especially
when he is exhausted by mental or physical labor,--far more so than
is ordinary sleep of the same duration. The same is true of the
catalepsy which supervenes after a long period of illness or of nervous
exhaustion. That this statement is true of the first class, we have
the testimony of all who have been subjects of intelligent experiment.
That it is true of the second class also, is attested by the fact that
suspended animation is nearly always followed by the recovery of the
patient from illness. The cataleptic condition marks the crisis in many
diseases, especially those of the nerves. If the patient is properly
managed during that crisis, his convalescence is assured.

Catalepsy may properly be divided into four classes, differing from
one another only in the causes which induce the condition. The first
is catalepsy from hypnotic suggestion; the second, epidemic catalepsy;
the third, self-induced catalepsy; the fourth, catalepsy arising from
disease or nervous exhaustion. Suggestion is the all-potent factor in
the production of the catalepsy of the first three classes, as it is
in the production of all other hypnotic phenomena. The suggestion may
come, first, from an operator who purposely induces the condition as
an experiment. Secondly, it may arise from the patient seeing other
cataleptic subjects. In such cases, catalepsy may run through a whole
school or a neighborhood, precisely as does epidemic insanity, St.
Vitus's dance, and many other nervous troubles. "Imitation," or the
disposition to imitate, has generally been assigned as the cause of
such manifestations becoming epidemic among children. But this is a
palpable error. It arises rather from the fear that each one feels--the
mental suggestion that each one makes--that he or she may be the
next victim. Thirdly, self-induced catalepsy is illustrated in the
experiments of the East Indian fakirs, and arises from auto-suggestion.
In these cases the condition is purely hypnotic, and is self-induced by
simple processes, well known to all who have made an intelligent study
of hypnotism as practised in the Orient.

It is not, however, with these classes that we have to deal in this
chapter, but rather with cases which arise from disease or nervous
exhaustion. In such cases, suggestion can hardly be considered as an
initial cause, although, as we shall see further on, it is a potent
factor in deepening, prolonging, and terminating the condition.

I have said that catalepsy marks the crisis in certain diseases.
It is, in fact, the supreme effort of nature to give the exhausted
nerves their needed rest. When this fact is once appreciated, and the
patient is intelligently treated on its basis, much needless alarm
will be saved, and many fatal errors will be avoided. The patient in
that condition is enjoying absolute rest. All the vital processes are
practically suspended. He is free from all pain, and is enjoying a
refreshing sleep,--a sleep so profound that it may be truly likened
to its "twin-brother, death." The depth and duration of the trance
will depend upon the necessities of the case. That is to say, it will
be proportioned to the severity of the patient's illness, and his
consequent need of rest and recuperation.

The primary mistake which many physicians make in managing cataleptic
patients consists in seeking, by heroic treatment, to hasten
restoration to consciousness. No greater mistake is possible. If the
attempt is successful, it causes a fearful shock to the nerves, and
the effort is thwarted which nature is making to relieve the patient
and give rest to his already overstrained nervous system. If it is
unsuccessful, the patient is threatened with the danger of being buried
alive, or of an autopsy. These dangers are ever present; and as long as
physicians fail to recognize the pregnant fact that an advanced stage
of decomposition is the only infallible test of death, just so long
will the human race be menaced with the horrors of premature burial.

The most important branch, however, of the subject of catalepsy is that
pertaining to its psychological features. I have said that catalepsy
belongs to the domain of hypnotism. I mean by this, not only that the
phenomenon is identical with the condition which can be produced by
the ordinary hypnotic processes, but that the cataleptic patient is
amenable to precisely the same psychological laws which govern the
ordinary hypnotic subject.

The two fundamental propositions which bear upon this subject are the
following:--

First, a patient in a case of suspended animation or catalepsy, induced
by disease or nervous exhaustion, is amenable to control by suggestion
precisely as he is in the ordinary hypnotic state.

Second, a patient in that condition is always conscious, subjectively,
of all that happens around him. That is to say, no matter how
profoundly the objective senses are locked in slumber, the subjective
faculties are ever alert, and the subject recognizes, often with great
acuteness, everything that goes on around him. This fact is not always
recognized by hypnotists, and it is safe to say that ignorance of this
one truth has been the source of more erroneous conclusions regarding
the significance of hypnotic phenomena than all other causes combined.
Hundreds of cases are reported where the patients noted all the
preparations for burial and all that was said and done, and yet were
unable to move or make the fact known that they were alive. This seems
to be the universal testimony, although it is possible that the patient
might not, in all cases, remember what he had experienced. In fact,
it is common for hypnotic subjects to forget their experiences during
the sleep; but that does not militate against the fact that they were
subjectively conscious at that time.

The conclusions derivable from these premises are as important as
they are obvious. The first and most vital is that when a patient is
suffering from a disease which will induce catalepsy, and begins to
enter that state, the usual remarks and conversation of those at the
bedside must inevitably tend to deepen and prolong the lethargy. The
patient appears to be dying. The friends, by word and action, are
conveying the impression that death is at hand. The physician feels
the pulse, which grows fainter and fainter, until it is no longer
perceptible. He examines the heart until its pulsations cease. Finally,
he turns to the stricken friends, and in a solemn voice announces that
all is over,--the patient is dead. Now, if it happens that it is merely
a case of catalepsy, or suspended animation, the announcement by the
physician that the patient is dead is an all-potent suggestion which
is, and must inevitably be, seized upon by the subject and carried to
its legitimate conclusion. A case of prolonged suspension of animation
is the inevitable result, as the laws of hypnotism teach, if they teach
anything. The patient actually believes that he is dead. The statement
of this proposition seems almost ridiculous; but when it is remembered
that no suggestion seems absurd or incongruous to the hypnotic subject,
the proposition is seen at once to be an absolute verity. Who has not
dreamed of being dead? Few, if any, have not had this experience; and
yet the incongruity of the two ideas--of being dead and of calmly
reflecting on the subject--never strikes the dreamer's subjective
intelligence. Subjective impressions never seem absurd or incongruous
to the subject. This principle runs through all subjective mental
action, from the dreams of the healthy sleeper to the hallucinations of
the monomaniac. Subjective intelligence, be it remembered, is capable
of exercising but one form of reasoning,--the deductive. But it will
reason deductively from any premise imparted to it, by any form of
suggestion, with great acumen; and it never arrives at a conclusion
inconsistent with the premise,--that is, the suggestion. All the facts
known to the individual's objective experience which are inconsistent
with that premise stand for nought in presence of the one ever-present
idea. That idea is the major premise, unquestioned and indisputable, of
a syllogism which he will inevitably complete with logical accuracy.

It is easy to see from what has been said what an appalling,
ever-present danger menaces the patient who, from any cause, becomes
cataleptic, especially the one who has reached the crisis of a
lingering illness, and is surrounded by physicians and friends who are
ignorant of the psychological principles involved. The natural language
of the emotions of the surviving friends, the wail of hopeless grief,
the administration of the sacraments of the Church, and, finally, the
authoritative announcement of the doctor that "He is dead!" all tend to
the one result. When to these are added the ice-pack or the embalmer's
fluid, it remains only for the performance of an autopsy to give the
_coup de gr�ce_.

I shall not attempt to apply the principles here laid down to
particular cases. Those who are cognizant of the circumstances of any
case, either recorded or within their own private experience, will
easily recognize their significance. Nor shall I attempt to prescribe
the specific course to be pursued where suspended animation is
suspected, as that is the province of the physician in attendance on
each particular case. My object will have been accomplished if what I
have said shall be the means of directing the attention of the medical
profession to the psychic aspects of catalepsy, and to a more careful
study of the psychology of that science which has suffered so much
at the hands of charlatanism on the one hand, and prejudice on the
other,--hypnotism.

Nevertheless, a few general observations regarding the proper course to
be pursued may not seem impertinent. It is obvious that when catalepsy
is suspected, or is possible, all allusion to or suggestion of death
should be avoided, especially by the physician in attendance. It should
not for a moment be forgotten that, however profoundly the objective
senses may be locked in insensibility, subjectively the patient is
awake and is taking cognizance of all that occurs, and appreciates with
wonderful, acuteness the significance of every word that is uttered. It
should be remembered that since suggestion can induce catalepsy, it can
also deepen and prolong the period of its duration. Conversely, it is
the most potent means of restoration. Other restoratives should rarely,
if ever, be resorted to. Violent means should never be employed. The
essential thing is a cheerful, confident demeanor in all present at the
bedside. Time should always be given for the conservative forces and
recuperative powers of nature to do their legitimate work, and in due
season the patient, who "is not dead, but sleepeth," will awake; or, in
obedience to suggestion, will "arise and come forth," saved from the
jaws of death,--rescued from the horrors of a living grave.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXII.

PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS.

    The Normal Relations of the Objective and Subjective
    Faculties.--Their Distinctive Powers and Functions.--The Infinite
    Wisdom displayed in their Distribution.--It constitutes Man a Free
    Moral Agent.--Limitation of Subjective Powers and Responsibilities
    in this Life.--The Kinship of the Soul to God.--The Limitation
    of the Powers of the Objective Mind.--The Transcendent Powers of
    the Soul.--Errors of the Old Philosophers.--The Normal Functions
    of the Soul in Earthly Life.--Dangers of Abnormal Exercise of
    Subjective Power.--Nervous Disorders, Insanity, Imbecility, and
    Moral Degradation.--The Importance of a Knowledge of the Law of
    Suggestion.--Dangers of Mediumship.--Trance-speakers.--Immoral
    Tendency of Ignorant Mediumship.--Tendency towards Free Love.--The
    Causes.--The Orientalists.--Their Greater Powers and their Greater
    Facilities for Self-delusion.--Practical Conclusions.--Warnings.


I have now presented the propositions of my hypothesis, together with
a brief outline showing its applicability to the leading psychic
phenomena; and it remains only to draw a few practical conclusions
which apply to every-day life. The first, and the most obviously
important one, relates to the exercise of subjective power, and the
normal relations of the objective and subjective faculties. In order to
do so clearly and concisely, it will be necessary to recall the terms
of the hypothesis.

The first proposition is that the mind of man is dual in character.
This proposition, as we have already stated, has been more or less
dimly recognized by many philosophers in all ages; and during the
present century it has been gradually assuming a more definite status
in mental philosophy. Assuming, therefore, this proposition to be
true, it necessarily follows that the two minds must, normally, bear a
harmonious relation to each other. It follows that one of the two minds
must, normally, be subordinated to the other. Otherwise there would be
a conflict. Just here Li�bault's discovery of the law of suggestion
comes in, and shows that the subjective mind is constantly controlled
by that power. It is true that Li�bault and his followers have applied
the law only to the elucidation of hypnotic phenomena; and in that
have not always carried it to its legitimate conclusion. But it has
seemed to me that if the law is applicable to one class of psychic
phenomena, it must be equally applicable to all, as nature's laws admit
of no exceptions. I have therefore declared, as the second proposition
of my hypothesis, that the subjective mind is always controllable by
suggestion.

Assuming, therefore, that these two propositions are true, it follows
as a necessary consequence that there must be some distinctive line
of difference between the methods of operation of the two minds. It
is obvious that there is a limitation of power in the subjective
mind, otherwise it could not be subordinated to the objective. Just
where this line of distinction could be drawn, and how it could
be formulated, was at first a perplexing question. There were no
authorities on the subject who ever hinted at a possible limitation of
reasoning power in either branch of the dual mind. On the contrary,
those who have observed the phenomena of subjective mental activity,
as seen in hypnotic subjects, in trance-speakers, and cognate
exhibitions, have been so profoundly impressed with its transcendent
powers that it has seemed impossible that it could be hedged about by
limitations. Philosophers from time immemorial have recognized its
tremendous powers of memory, and millions have sat entranced by the
eloquence of subjective speakers, and noted with profound admiration
their accuracy of logical deduction. So impressed has the world been
by such exhibitions that the soul has been held up as the infallible
guide to all that is pure and noble and good in humanity. It has
been called the Ego (which it truly is), and as such it has been
recognized as the inward monitor, whose monitions are always entitled
to reverential consideration. It was difficult, therefore, to imagine
any line of distinction between the two branches of the dual mind
which would place the subjective in a subordinate position. But for
the discovery of Li�bault's law of suggestion that line would never
have been recognized. It now becomes evident, however, that the point
of its limitation of reasoning power is the starting-point. It has not
the power to formulate its own premises. The subsidiary proposition
of our general hypothesis is, therefore, that _the subjective mind is
incapable of inductive reasoning_. It will readily be seen that it is a
corollary of the law of suggestion; but the three propositions together
furnish the key to the whole science of psychology.

I am aware that those who have hitherto regarded the soul as possessing
all the intellectual powers, as well as all the moral attributes, will
be shocked when they realize that the object of their admiration is
hedged about with any limitations whatever. The first question they
will ask is, "Why is it that God has given to man a soul possessing
such transcendent powers in certain directions, and yet under the
absolute control, in all its ideas and intellectual functions, of a
finite, perishable intelligence?" The broad and comprehensive answer
is, _To constitute man a free moral agent_. It needs no argument to
show that if the soul were not so limited in its initiative power of
reasoning, the finite, mortal man could not be held responsible for
the moral status of his soul. God gave to objective man the powers of
reason, inductive as well as deductive, for the purpose of enabling him
successfully to struggle with his physical environment. He gave him the
power to know the right from the wrong. He gave him supreme control
of the initial processes of reasoning, and thus made him responsible
for the moral status of his soul. The soul, in the mean time, so long
as it inhabits the body, is charged with limited responsibilities. It
is the life-principle of the body, and its normal functions pertain
solely to the preservation of human life and the perpetuation of the
human race. It possesses wonderful powers in other directions, under
certain abnormal conditions of the body, it is true. But their exercise
outside of those limits is always abnormal, and productive of untoward
results. Those powers of which we catch occasional glimpses, and which
so excite our admiration, are powers which pertain to its existence in
a future world. They are powers which proclaim it as a part of God, as
partaking of the nature and attributes of the Divine Mind. Its powers
of perception of the fixed laws of nature demonstrate its kinship
to Omniscience. It is independent of the feeble powers of inductive
reasoning when it is freed from its earthly trammels; and there is not
one power or attribute peculiar to the finite, objective mind that
could be of any service to the soul in its eternal home. We boast of
our powers of inductive reason, forgetting how little we have learned,
or ever can know, compared with what there is to learn. We forget that
they are the outgrowth of our physical wants and necessities, and
simply enable us to grope in the dark for the means of subsistence, and
to render our physical existence tolerable. The powers of the objective
mind, compared with those of the subjective mind, may be likened to a
man born in a cave, in which the light of the sun never entered, and
supplied only with a rushlight with which to grope his way and find
the means of subsistence. The light, feeble as it is, is invaluable to
him; for by its means he is enabled gradually to learn his bearings,
to take note of his environment, to make occasional discoveries of the
necessities of life, and finally to achieve some of the comforts of
existence. The more he discovers, the more he appreciates the value
of his rushlight and the more he boasts of its transcendent powers of
illumination. He hears vague reports of an outside world where the
comforts and luxuries of life are comparatively easy to obtain, and he
resolves to grope his way out. He is told that the outside world is
lighted by a great luminary which will render his rushlight of no value
to him except as a reminder of the limitations of his cave-life. But
he is sceptical, and points with pride to his accumulations and the
discoveries he has made with the aid of his "God-given illuminant," and
refuses to believe that there is a possible state of existence which
would be tolerable without rushlights. At length a cataclysm of nature
throws him upon the outside world in the full blaze of the light of a
midday sun. He then finds that he is in a world of light; that he can
perceive things as they are, and observe their bearings and relations
to each other, and he finds that the rays of his rushlight are no
longer visible. It is obvious that this is but a feeble illustration of
the difference between the powers of inductive inquiry into the laws
of nature, and the powers of perception possessed by the subjective
entity. When the soul is freed from its physical trammels it ascends
to its native realm of truth, and, untrammelled by false suggestions
arising from the imperfect knowledge of the objective mind, it "sees
God as he is;" that is, it apprehends all his laws, and imbibes truth
from its Eternal Source.

It must not be forgotten in this connection that the subjective mind
is the soul, or spirit, and is itself an organized entity, possessing
independent powers and functions; while the objective mind is merely
the function of the physical brain, and possesses no powers whatever
independently of the physical organization. The one possesses dynamic
force independently of the body; the other does not. The one is capable
of sustaining an existence independently of the body; the other dies
with it. It is just here that the ancient philosophers made their
greatest error; and that error has been transmitted down through
all the ages. They recognized the dual character of the mind, but
saw no fundamental difference in the functions of the two minds. It
never occurred to them that there was, or could be, any limitation of
power in either that was not common to both. They recognized man as
a trinity, the three elements of which are "body, soul, and spirit."
The soul, in their system of philosophy, corresponds to the objective
mind, and the spirit to the subjective mind. They considered only the
functions of the two minds as minds, and constantly regarded the
two as possessing only co-ordinate powers. Or, if they regarded them
as entities, they considered that while each was an entity, it was,
somehow, inseparably joined to the other in function and destiny.
Hence, according to their philosophy, if one survived the death of
the body, both must survive it. This fundamental error shows itself,
in various forms, in every system of philosophy, from Plato down; and
it will continue to breed confusion and uncertainty in the human mind
until the fact is recognized that the subjective mind, or spirit, as
Plato designates it, is a distinct entity, possessing independent
powers and functions; whereas the objective mind, or the "soul," of
the ancient philosopher, is merely the function of the physical brain.
This latter proposition is demonstrated by every consideration of its
powers, functions, and limitations. Its powers wholly depend upon the
physical condition of the brain. They decline as the body weakens.
They become deranged and useless as the brain becomes disorganized
from physical causes. Its distinctive functions pertain solely to
physical existence. It has the power of independent inductive reasoning
to compensate for its total want of power to perceive by intuition.
But, as I have already pointed out, inductive reasoning is merely
a laborious method of inquiry, and pertains wholly to our physical
existence. It would be as useless to the spirit in an existence where
all truth is perceived by intuition, as a tallow-dip in the full blaze
of a noonday sun. It may be set down as a maxim in spiritual philosophy
that there is not one power or function of the objective mind which
distinguishes it from those of the subjective entity, that could be of
any service to the latter when it is freed from its earthly environment.

The peculiar functions of the physical brain are therefore no more
entitled to be considered as an immortal entity, or as any necessary
part or function of an immortal entity, than are the physical functions
of deglutition or digestion, or the physical power of pedal locomotion.

It is not for man to question the wisdom of God in so ordaining the
relations of the soul to the body as to subordinate the eternal to the
perishable. But it is man's duty so to exercise his powers of induction
as to ascertain those relations; and, having done so according to
his best lights, so to order his conduct as to do his whole duty to
himself and his Creator. As we find those relations exist, the whole
responsibility rests upon the objective man. He is a free moral agent,
and has it in his power to train his soul for weal or woe, for this
life and for eternity.

It is of the relations which exist between objective and subjective
man in this life that I propose to offer a few practical suggestions
at this time. I have already shown that the normal functions of the
subjective mind are apparently limited to the preservation of human
life and the perpetuation of the human race. These functions are
manifested in what are known as instincts. The first is the instinct
of self-preservation; the second is the instinct of reproduction;
and the third pertains to the preservation of the offspring. In the
last may be included the instinctive desire to preserve human life
generally. Outside of these limits all phenomenal subjective mental
activity appears to be abnormal. I say _appears_ to be abnormal, for
the reason that we have no means of judging, except from a consensus
of facts. The facts which pertain to the subject can be found in the
greatest abundance in spiritistic circles, for the reason that it is
there that subjective activity is greatest in modern times. I venture
to say that no one of the better class of spiritists will deny the fact
that most professional mediums eventually become physical wrecks; many
are overtaken by mental derangement, and some by a moral degradation
too loathsome to be described. Few, if any, escape serious physical
trouble. This, of itself, is sufficient evidence of abnormality,
and should serve as a warning against the too frequent exercise of
subjective power. The majority of spiritistic mediums are more or less
afflicted with nervous disorders, and many of them are hysterical to
the last degree. Most of them complain of extreme nervous exhaustion
after a s�ance, and many require days to recover from the effects of a
prolonged exercise of subjective power. It may be said that I mistake
the cause for the effect; that is, that it may be only weak and nervous
physical organisms that are capable of exercising subjective power. I
am aware that the question is not free from difficulty, and that one
is liable to fall into error in discussing a subject that is so little
understood. The fact remains, nevertheless, that nervous disorders and
mediumship are generally associated, and that fact alone is indicative
of abnormality. Whether we are to regard the exercise of subjective
power as productive of abnormal physical conditions, or are to suppose
that it requires an abnormal physical organism to produce subjective
phenomena, matters little. The conclusion must be the same,--that the
exercise of subjective power is abnormal, and should be avoided until
more is known of the proper conditions of its exercise than has yet
been discovered.

There is a further difficulty attending the consideration of this
subject which must not be lost sight of, and that is the question how
far suggestion may enter as a factor in the case. It is well known
that some mesmeric healers fancy that "they take on the conditions of
the patient," as they phrase it. That is, they feel the symptoms which
afflict the patient. There is no question of the fact that those who
enter upon the treatment of a case with that idea firmly fixed in their
minds will experience the anticipated sensations, often to a marked
degree. But late scientific experiments disclose the fact that such
phenomena are always the effect of suggestion. The physical exhaustion
which some healers feel after the treatment of a case is also
largely due to suggestion. These effects may always be counteracted
by a vigorous auto-suggestion; and, moreover, the same means may be
effectively employed to produce exactly the opposite effects upon
the operator. That is to say, the mental healer, by whatever method
he does his work, may always cause his treatment of a patient to
redound to his own benefit, as well as to that of the patient, by the
exercise of the power of auto-suggestion. It is therefore impossible
to say just how far suggestion enters as a factor in the production of
untoward physical results from the exercise of mediumistic power. It
is certainly traditional among the fraternity that nervous exhaustion
ensues from its exercise, and the results are appalling. How far the
effects may be counteracted by intelligent auto-suggestion, remains
to be settled by the process of evolution. There is, however, little
hope of any change for the better so long as the spiritistic medium
believes himself to be under the domination of an extraneous force
which is beyond his control, and the effects of which he is powerless
to mitigate.

This phase of the subject is, however, of little importance compared
with the mental effects produced by the too persistent exercise of the
subjective faculties in the production of phenomena. Again we must draw
our illustrations from spiritistic circles. It is undeniable that the
tendency of mediumship is to unhinge the mind, to destroy the mental
balance, and often to produce the worst forms of insanity. And it is
noticeable that the more thoroughly sincere the medium is in his belief
in the genuineness of his power to evoke the spirits of the dead, the
greater is the tendency to insanity. The reason is obvious. If he
sincerely believes himself to be under the control of an extraneous
power, he yields implicit obedience to that power; especially if it
assumes to be a superior mentality, as it generally does. Instead of
assuming control of the power, he allows it to control him. As a matter
of course, he is ignorant of the laws pertaining to it. He is ignorant
of the fact that the force which controls him resides within himself,
and is not a superior being commissioned from Heaven to convey a
message from the Source of all knowledge. He is dazed by its wonderful
exhibitions of superior intelligence, is captivated by its eloquence,
and awed by its assumption of authority. In short, he knows nothing of
its source, or the limitations of its powers of reasoning. The result
is that he yields implicit obedience to its guidance in all things. His
reason has abdicated its throne and abandoned its functions, and he is
at the mercy of his subjective mind, which, in turn, is controlled by
the false suggestions of his own disorganized and subjugated objective
intelligence. His physical degeneracy keeps pace with his mental
decline, his whole nervous system is prostrated by excessive exercise
of subjective power, and too frequently the end is acute mania or
drivelling imbecility.

One of the most fascinating and seductive forms of subjective mental
activity is exhibited in trance, or inspirational, speaking. A medium
of fair intelligence and some education, obtained, perhaps, by
desultory reading of spiritistic and miscellaneous literature, develops
himself into an inspirational speaker. As a sincere spiritist, he
believes himself to be controlled by some great spirit who in life
was celebrated for his eloquence. He ascends the rostrum and amazes
his audience by his wonderful oratory, his marvellous command of the
resources of his mind, and, above all, by the clearness and cogency of
his reasoning. Those who have known him before and are aware of the
limits of his education are the most surprised of all, and no argument
can convince them that he is not inspired by some almost superhuman
intelligence from another world. They know nothing of the wonders of
subjective mental power; they have no knowledge of the perfection of
subjective memory, which gives the speaker perfect command of all he
has ever read, or of the logical exactitude of the deductive reasoning
of the subjective intelligence. The speaker, on his part, finds himself
in possession of such wonderful powers and resources, emanating, as
he believes, from an extraneous source, abandons his old pursuits,
and devotes himself to the work of his inspiration. It is an easy
and pleasurable existence for the time being. He finds that there is
no need of taking thought of what he is to say, for ideas, and words
with which to clothe them, flow from him like a mountain torrent. He
finds himself in possession of knowledge which he has no objective
recollection of ever having acquired, and of ideas which were foreign
to his objective intelligence. He believes, and, from his standpoint,
has every reason to believe, that he is inspired by some lofty spirit
whose knowledge is unlimited and whose resources are unfailing. He
feels that he has no need of further reading or study, and the work of
objective intellectual labor soon becomes a drudgery. The result is
that his objective intellectual growth soon comes to a stand-still,
and at length his objective intellect begins to deteriorate. In the
mean time his subjective powers may continue to grow in brilliancy
for a time, or at least they shine with a new lustre, as they are
compared with the deepening dulness of his objective intellect.
At length he becomes fitful, erratic, eccentric. As his objective
powers deteriorate, they no longer have any semblance of control
over his subjective mind. The suggestions which reason, in its best
estate, may have given to his subjective mind, as a starting-point
for his discourses, are no longer available, for his power to reason
is failing. His friends, who follow him from place to place, begin
to notice that he talks one thing at one place, and the opposite at
another. They attribute the fact to the control of different spirits at
different times, and for a time they are consoled. Eventually the fact
is forced upon them that in his normal, or objective, condition he is
growing more and more erratic, and that at times his conversation is
the merest drivel. As in all the other forms of subjective development
mentioned, his physical deterioration keeps pace with his mental
decline. In the mean time his subjective powers appear to deteriorate.
It is not true, in fact, that his subject mind, _per se_, deteriorates,
for that is impossible. But as it is always controlled by suggestion,
it necessarily takes its cue from the suggestions conveyed to it by
the objective mind. When that ceases to develop, the subjective mind
keeps on in its old rut, for the obvious reason that no new ideas
are imparted to it. When the objective mind begins to deteriorate,
its suggestions are no longer coherent, and the subjective mind is
necessarily incoherent in exact proportion. Its deductions from a false
or imbecile suggestion will be logically correct; but, as a matter
of course, a false, extravagant, or imbecile premise, followed to
its legitimate, logical conclusion, necessarily leads the mind into a
corresponding maze of extravagance and imbecility. It is therefore no
indication of a decline of subjective powers, but it is a demonstration
of the universality of the law of suggestion. It goes without saying
that if an inspirational speaker were aware of the source of his power,
and of the laws which govern it, and would constantly keep it under the
control of his reason, he could utilize it to the very best advantage.
A cultured man of well-balanced intellect would then formulate his own
premises according to the best lights obtainable through the processes
of inductive reasoning, and "inspiration would do the rest." If his
premises were correct, the subjective mind could always be depended
upon to deduce the correct conclusions, and to illustrate them by
drawing upon the resources of its perfect memory of all that the
individual has ever seen, heard, or read bearing upon the subject.
Such a man would be known as a man of "genius," in whatever direction
he exercised his powers. And just in proportion to the natural powers
and cultivation of his objective mind and the extent of his objective
information would his subjective manifestations be brilliant and
powerful.

I do not say that such an exercise of subjective power would not be
abnormal and productive of untoward physical consequences. Men of
genius in all ages of the world have unconsciously exercised this
power. But men of genius the world over have been too often noted for
abnormalities of character and conduct. Profane history furnishes but
one example where a man of genius appears to have been in possession of
objective and subjective powers perfectly balanced, and who was able to
utilize his enormous objective advantages, resulting from constant and
intimate association with the greatest minds of his generation, in the
subjective production of works which must always stand pre-eminent. It
is unnecessary to say that I allude to Shakspeare. So little is known
of his private life that it is impossible to judge whether abnormal
physical effects resulted from his labors. But his works are full of
internal evidence that his subjective powers were under the constant
control of a well-trained and perfectly balanced objective intellect.

It is of course impossible to say just how far subjective power might,
normally, be employed in the direction indicated, in the absolute
dearth of examples where it has been employed with a full knowledge
of the laws which govern it. But certain it is that so long as it is
exercised under the delusion that it is an extraneous and superior
power, over which the objective man possesses no control, just so
long will the victim of the delusion be subject to the caprice of an
irresponsible power, which will eventually drive him to the horrors of
insanity or leave him in the darkness of imbecility.

Of greater importance than either the physical or mental deterioration
of the one who habitually exercises subjective power in the production
of phenomena, is the moral aspect of the question. One may escape
serious physical consequences of mediumship, or he may succeed in
maintaining a sufficient outward semblance of mental equilibrium to
keep out of the insane asylum; but no well-informed spiritist of the
better class will attempt to deny or weaken the force of the statement
that a mephitic moral atmosphere surrounds the average spiritistic
medium. I do not assert by any means that all mediums are immoral. On
the contrary, there are many noble men and pure women who habitually
exercise mediumistic power. Otherwise, the tendency to looseness of
morals which characterizes so many of them would be difficult to
account for on other than physiological grounds. Books have been
written to account for this tendency, on the hypothesis that immorality
is a consequence of the nervous derangement which follows the practice
of mediumship. This hypothesis necessarily presupposes the invariable
connection of immorality with a nervous disorder, and the latter with
mediumship. The common experience of mankind may be invoked to prove
that there is no invariable connection of the kind existing. Another
cause must therefore be sought for the too-frequent association of
immorality with mediumship.

Those who have followed me in my brief analysis of the causes which
conspire to bring about the mental deterioration of the spiritistic
medium will anticipate me in what I have to say concerning the causes
of the moral degradation of the same class. The medium, if he is
sincere in his professions of belief in the alleged communication of
spirits of the dead through him, believes himself to be under the
care and control of a higher and purer mentality than his own. He
believes in its lofty assumptions of mental and moral superiority, and
he becomes accustomed to ask its advice in all things pertaining to
his personal well-being. He frequently finds its advice to be of the
best, and he gradually accustoms himself to submit to its guidance in
all things. He assumes and believes that in the clearer light of the
world of spirits many of the artificialities of mundane civilization
are held in pitying contempt, and he frequently comes to believe
that many of the restraints of human society are purely artificial,
and have no foundation in true morality or religion. He generally
regards himself as a reformer, having broken away from the orthodox
creed, and becomes the advocate of a new religion. Like most radical
reformers who find the world all wrong in one respect, he immediately
assumes that it is wrong in everything; and nothing will satisfy his
ambition short of destroying the whole fabric of civilized society, and
instituting a new order of things more suited to his ideas of human
progress and felicity. It all too frequently happens that one of the
first "artificial" institutions of society which becomes the object of
private attack by the spiritual medium is the marriage relation. He
sees much domestic infelicity surrounding him, and is perhaps tired
of the restraints which it imposes upon himself, and he consults his
spirit guide as to the propriety of setting at defiance the laws of
human society in that regard. Now, if his "spirit guide" were what he
believed it to be, or what it assumed to be,--a pure and lofty spirit,
disenthralled from the temptations and weaknesses of the flesh, and
drawing inspiration from the society of just men made perfect,--there
could be no doubt of the character of the advice it would give him.
But, being the medium's own subjective entity, bound by the laws of its
being to control by the power of suggestion, it necessarily follows the
line of thought which is uppermost in the medium's objective mind, and
it gives the advice most desired. Moreover, from the premises suggested
by the unhallowed lusts of the medium, it will frame an argument so
plausible and convincing to his willing mind that he will fancy that,
in following the advice of his "control," he is obeying the holiest
impulses implanted in his nature by a God of love.

I do not charge spiritists as a class with being advocates of the
doctrines of free love. On the contrary, I am aware that, as a class,
they hold the marriage relation in sacred regard. I cannot forget,
however, that but a few years ago some of their leading advocates
and mediums proclaimed the doctrine of free love in all its hideous
deformity from every platform in the land. Nor do I fail to remember
that the better class of spiritists everywhere repudiated the doctrine
and denounced its advocates and exemplars. Nevertheless, the moral
virus took effect here and there all over the country, and it is doing
its deadly work in secret in many an otherwise happy home. And I charge
a large and constantly growing class of professional mediums with being
the leading propagandists of the doctrine of free love. They infest
every community in the land, and it is well known to all men and women
who are dissatisfied or unhappy in their marriage relations that they
can always find sympathy by consulting the average medium, and can,
moreover, find justification for illicit love by invoking the spirits
of the dead through such mediums.

As before remarked, I do not charge mediums as a class with immoral
practices, nor do I say that the exercise of subjective power, _per
se_, has a tendency to induce immoral practices. What I do say is, that
through a want of knowledge of the laws which pertain to subjective
mental activity, the one who exercises that power in the form of
mediumship is in constant danger of being led astray. He invokes a
power that he knows nothing of,--a power which may, at any time, turn
and rend him.

The man or woman whose heart is pure, in whom the principles of
virtue and morality are innate, is in no danger of being corrupted by
the exercise of mediumistic power. The auto-suggestions of such are
constantly on the side of virtue, and a corrupt communication could not
emanate from such a source. But to the young, whose characters are not
formed, and to those whose notions of morality are loose, the dangers
of mediumship are appalling.

I have felt obliged to draw my illustrations from spirit mediums for
the reason that mediumship is the form which subjective activity takes
in the Western world. Other forms, however, are being introduced from
the Orient, and may soon become common in this country. The Western
world is threatened with a revival of the arts of the magician, the
conjurer, and the wizard. It may be true, and doubtless is, that the
Eastern adepts know more of the practice of subjective arts than is
dreamed of by spiritists. The fact that they denounce as dangerous to
health, morals, and sanity the practice of mediumship, is a hopeful
sign. That they are aware that the power which controls the medium
emanates from himself, is demonstrative of their advancement in
practical knowledge of the subject. But that they are reliable guides
to the safe exercise of subjective power has not been demonstrated. It
is certain that they are yet ignorant of the fundamental principles
which underlie the science of the soul, for they have yet to learn the
law of suggestion, and to appreciate the subtle _r�le_ which that power
plays in every psychic phenomenon. Their whole system of spiritual
philosophy has been built up in ignorance of that law, and hence they
are necessarily subject to the same delusions, arising from the same
sources of error, that have misguided all mankind, in all the ages of
the world, prior to the discovery of that law. They believe in their
power to communicate with the spirits of another world, precisely the
same as do the modern spiritists. The foundation of their belief is the
same; namely, psychic phenomena produced by themselves, in ignorance
of the fundamental laws which govern it. The only difference resides
in the fact that the Orientalists have the power to produce a greater
variety of startling phenomena, and hence are in possession of greater
facilities for deceiving themselves. No advantage, therefore, can be
gained by studying their philosophy or practising their arts, except as
a means of gaining general information or for purposes of scientific
experiment; and the warning against indulging in the indiscriminate
practice of mediumship holds good against the too frequent exercise
of subjective power in any direction, or for any purpose save that of
scientific investigation or healing the sick.

It should be remembered always that the power of the subjective entity
is the most potential force in nature, and when intelligently directed
the most beneficent. But, like every other power in nature misdirected,
its destructive force is equally potent.

In conclusion, I desire again to impress upon the reader the absolute
necessity of always holding the subjective entity under the positive
domination of objective reason; and I here repeat, what I have
again and again sought to enforce, that insanity consists in the
usurpation by the subjective mind of the throne of reason. The terrible
potentialities of the subjective entity are as much to be feared as
admired, and no faculty that it possesses is more to be dreaded and
guarded against than its awful power and inexorable exactitude of
logical deduction, when reasoning from premises that have not been
demonstrated by the processes of induction.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    The Great Stumbling-block, Unbelief in the Physical History of
    Christ.--Modern Science confirms the New Testament.--Internal
    Evidence of the Truth of the History of Jesus.--The Scientific
    Accuracy of his Statements.--The Exoteric and the Esoteric
    Doctrines.--Parables.--Esoteric Doctrines Reserved for Modern
    Science to discover.--The Spirit of Truth.--Jesus the first to
    proclaim the Scientific Truth.--The Doctrine of Faith.--Healing the
    Sick.--Natural Law.--Faith essential then as now.--Illustrative
    Incidents.--Jairus' Daughter.--Seven Scientific Steps.--Secrecy
    enjoined.--Scientific Reasons.---Rediscovery of the Science of
    Mental Therapeutics in Modern Times.--Nothing discovered that Jesus
    did not know.--Absent Treatment.--The Power to heal transmitted to
    all Future Generations.--The Conditions.--Conclusions.


It was no part of my original intention in writing this book to enter
upon the discussion of theological questions, or to speculate upon the
possible condition of the soul after the death of the body. Nor shall
I, to any great extent, enter upon that prolific field of discussion
at this time. Nevertheless, I cannot refrain from presenting a few
thoughts which have forced themselves upon me concerning the relation
which the hypothesis under consideration bears to the history and
doctrines of the man Jesus Christ. In doing so I hope to offend no
man's theology, and to avoid the accusation of seeking to "open the
secret of spiritual life in the criminal court of empirical philosophy."

It has often been said that the laws which enable man to perceive
spiritual truths, or to apprehend the relation which his spiritual
nature bears to the Christ, cannot be formulated by any known methods
of finite reasoning, that spiritual truth must be approached from the
spiritual side, and that it must be perceived by the eye of faith.
Nevertheless, there are many who have never been able to attain that
faith in the spiritual nature of Christ, for the reason that they
persist in approaching him by and through the finite processes of
reasoning. Their conceptions of him come through the history of his
physical life, and their doubts arise through their unbelief in the
verity of the history of his physical manifestations. The history of
critical warfare upon Christianity will bear out the statement that
this is, and has ever been, the great stumbling-block. The assaults of
scepticism have always been upon the man Christ; and, being unable to
reconcile the accounts of his physical history and manifestations with
the laws of nature, as understood by his critics, sceptics have ignored
the spiritual side of his character, and ended in total unbelief in his
divine attributes.

If, therefore, the discoveries of modern science can be made to
throw any light upon the history of the man Jesus; if they confirm
all that has been said of the physical phenomena which characterized
his career,--the first great obstacle which stands in the way of the
acceptance of the essential spiritual doctrines which he promulgated
will be removed.

If, in addition to that, it can be shown that the discoveries of modern
science not only confirm the story of his physical manifestations,
but demonstrate the essential truth of the central idea which he
promulgated concerning man's immortality, show the philosophy of
his mission on earth, and prove that he was, and is, as a matter of
scientific truth, the Saviour of the souls of men, there will be little
left upon which scepticism can hang a reasonable doubt.

I undertake to say that modern science can do all this, and more.

It has often been said that the New Testament bears internal evidence
of its own truth. This is true. But it is not true in the sense in
which it has been stated. It has been said that such evidence consists
in the alleged fact that at the time when Christ lived, there was no
one else capable of formulating the code of ethics and morals which he
promulgated. That this is not true is evidenced by the writings of many
who preceded him. The golden rule itself, which may be said to embody
the noblest conception which has been given to mankind of man's duty
to his fellow-man, is found in the writings of Confucius. The code of
ethics found in the writings of the ancient Greek philosophers will
compare favorably with anything found in the New Testament. It is not
in this, therefore, that the internal evidence of the truth of the New
Testament is to be found.

But I undertake to say that in view of the state of scientific
knowledge which existed at the time when Christ appeared on earth, it
was absolutely impossible that a fictitious character could have been
created, embodying the salient features of the physical history and
character of Christ, by any one of his day and generation. The writers
of the New Testament must have had an original from which to write
the history, draw the character, and state the attributes of Christ.
This is especially true of his physical history and manifestations;
for no one but he was at that time capable of doing his work or of
formulating with scientific accuracy the secret and source of his
power. Nor was any one of his day capable of conceiving the ideas
which he promulgated concerning his spiritual mission on earth, or of
stating, as he did, the exact conditions upon which mankind must depend
for salvation and immortality. He did not formulate the scientific
principles which underlie his doctrines, for the world was not ready to
receive, nor capable of appreciating, them; he only stated the facts.
It has been left for the discoveries of modern science to demonstrate
the scientific accuracy of his statements. That he understood the
principles which underlie his doctrines and constitute the secret of
his power, goes without saying; but his biographers did not understand
them, or, if they did, they were as reticent as he was. Nor is it
important to know whether they were or were not in possession of that
knowledge. The point is, that they could not have created the character
without the original to draw from, and, _a fortiori_, they could not
have formulated the doctrines which, after the lapse of nineteen
hundred years, prove to be scientifically correct. But it is said that
they were inspired. Leaving out of consideration the theological idea
of inspiration, it is certain that they were inspired in the highest
and best sense of the word. They were inspired by the authoritative
declarations of the Master,--by his statement of the great principles
of his philosophy; by the words of him "who spake as never man
spake,"--words of which he made the declaration, that, "though heaven
and earth shall pass away, my words shall not pass away." With this
view of the source of the inspiration of the writers of the New
Testament, the internal evidence of the essential truth of the history
of Jesus Christ is demonstrative.

If Jesus had formulated the scientific principles which pertain to
his doctrines and his works, and had taught them to his disciples,
there would have been no internal evidence whatever of the truth of
his history, or that he ever existed. The reason is obvious. If his
biographers had been in possession of that knowledge, no matter from
what source they obtained it, it would have been possible for them to
create a fictitious character possessing all the powers and attributes
of Christ. A few years ago it would have been impossible for the most
lively imagination to picture two men, standing a thousand miles apart,
transmitting oral messages to each other over a wire stretched between
them. If, however, a statement had been made by any one that he had
seen the feat performed, the existence of the telephone to-day would be
demonstrative evidence of the truth of his statement, however sceptical
his own generation might have been. In other words, the discoveries of
modern science would have developed the fact that he spoke the truth.
If it were known that the man who made the statement knew absolutely
nothing of the science of electricity, the internal evidence of its
truth would be all the stronger; for a man well versed in the science
of electricity might be supposed to be capable of imagining the
possibility of such an invention, and stating its existence as a fact.
But a man ignorant of electrical laws could by no possibility conceive
the idea of the telephone; he must be presented with the concrete fact
in order to be able to state it intelligently.

It was so with the biographers of Jesus. They knew nothing of the
scientific principles involved in the performance of his wonderful
works. They knew only the facts, and they recorded them. He gave to
his apostles just enough information to enable them to continue his
work. He stated the conditions of success, and promised the world
that whosoever complied with those conditions should be able to do
even greater works than he had done. He formulated the doctrine
of immortality, and stated the conditions of its attainment. His
biographers have recorded his words, but not his reasons, for he
gave none. If, therefore, science demonstrates that the powers that
he possessed are possible, that the conditions of their exercise
are precisely what he declared them to be, and that they cannot be
exercised without a strict compliance with those conditions, the
internal evidence for the truth of his history is overwhelming.
Modified by the nature of the subject, and of the proofs required, the
same may be said of his spiritual doctrines.

His practical wisdom is nowhere shown more conspicuously than in his
reticence. He had two very important reasons for withholding a full
disclosure of the underlying principles of his philosophy, or of the
laws which pertain to his physical manifestations. The first was that
the world was not ready to receive the whole truth. This was said to
his disciples during his last interview with them previous to his
crucifixion. "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now." He had given to his followers all that it was expedient
to give in that age. He had told them the conditions of salvation.
He had taught them how to heal the sick. He had taught them how to
employ their powers in doing good, both physically and spiritually. But
he knew that the same power which he taught them how to use for the
physical benefit of mankind might also, in the hands of wicked men, be
employed for doing evil. He knew that the condition of its exercise for
evil purposes was a full knowledge of the laws which pertain to it.
He knew that in the hands of the majority of the men of his day and
generation it was a dangerous power,--too dangerous to be intrusted to
the world in its then stage of public and private virtue, morality,
religion, and enlightenment.

There was an exoteric doctrine which he promulgated to the world, and
an esoteric doctrine which he deemed it inexpedient to divulge before
the world was prepared to receive it. His whole career illustrates this
important fact.

His habit of speaking to the multitude in parables, together with
his reasons for so doing, constitutes the strongest evidence of his
determination to conceal his esoteric doctrines from the common people.

    "And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto
    them in parables?

    "He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to
    know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
    given....

    "Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see
    not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand....

    "For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
    hearing, and their eyes they have closed....

    "All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and
    without a parable spake he not unto them:

    "That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
    saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which
    have been kept secret from the foundation of the world."[39]

These passages make it as clear as words can formulate a proposition
that he deemed it inexpedient to divulge to the people anything more
than they could understand and assimilate. His estimate of men and his
knowledge of their needs were perfect; and he gave to each class with
whom he had to deal, just what was necessary to enable it to perform
the work assigned to it. He taught the multitude the principles of
morality and justice among men, and pointed the way to eternal life;
but he did not teach them how to heal the sick. He taught his chosen
ones the true method of healing the sick, and divulged the exact
conditions of its exercise; but he did not teach them the scientific
principles upon which his system of healing was founded. They were no
more capable of understanding those principles than were the multitude
capable of acquiring the power to heal the sick. He gave to each
according to his needs; and, true to his spiritual mission, Christ
enjoined upon all men the necessity of first seeking the kingdom of
heaven, when all other needful things would be added unto them. It
was not necessary for his disciples to know the esoteric science of
healing, in order to enable them to heal the sick, any more than it is
for us to-day. We may know how little the knowledge of true scientific
principles involved in the exercise of that power has to do with
success in healing, when we observe the diversity of views entertained
on the subject by the successful healers of modern times. Christ gave
to the world all the knowledge necessary for the successful exercise of
that power in the one word _faith_. He was the first who taught that
lesson to mankind; and it holds as good to-day as it did when he first
proclaimed it to the multitude upon the banks of the Jordan.

The second reason for withholding a statement of the scientific
principles involved in his manifestations of power and his spiritual
philosophy was that he foresaw the time approaching when the world
would reason it out for itself; and that when that time came, mankind
would be prepared to receive it. He foresaw that in the progress of
civilization and enlightenment the time would surely come when the
world would not be content to rest its belief upon the doctrine of
any one, whatever his claims to inspiration or authority. In other
words, he foresaw the present age of materialism, and its tendency
towards scepticism regarding everything which cannot be scientifically
demonstrated by the inductive processes of reasoning. He knew that when
that epoch should have arrived in the history of man's intellectual
development, the truth of his doctrines would be all the more forcibly
impressed upon mankind if they could be proved by the inexorable rules
of logic. Besides, science and inductive reasoning would have been
lost upon the people with whom he had to deal. That he fully realized
this is shown by his implied rebuke to the nobleman of Capernaum,
when he exclaimed, "Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe." To have attempted to reason with them would have been like
"casting pearls before swine." He appealed to them by the only logic
they could understand. He offered to them the only evidence they could
appreciate,--the evidence of their senses.

That Christ foresaw the time when the world would be in possession of
indubitable evidence of the truth concerning him, but that he knew
that the time had not yet come, is clearly shown by his remarks to his
disciples in his memorable interview with them just previous to his
crucifixion:

    "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
    now."[40]

This refers to the then existing conditions. He had given them all
the proofs that they were capable of appreciating of the truth of his
doctrines. In the next sentence he refers to the time to come, when
still more evidence would be given to the world.

    "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you
    into all truth."[41]

This clearly refers to the time, which was yet to come, when mankind
should seek the truth and demand to know it. The "Spirit of truth" is
a personification of that spirit in man which seeks to learn the truth
for its own sake, by the only process known to this world,--inductive
reasoning. That day has come. The Spirit of truth is abroad throughout
all the civilized world, and it demands reasons for the faith that is
in the Christian Church.

Again Christ said:--

    "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
    Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father,
    he shall testify of me:

    "And ye shall also bear witness, because ye have been with me from
    the beginning."[42]

The first verse above quoted has the same meaning as this last
quotation. The second refers to the events of his life of which they
were witnesses. He foresaw that the record of those events would be
read by future generations, and compared with later experiments. He
had left the power to heal as a heritage to all who should come after
him, possessing the requisite faith; and he knew that the testimony
of his disciples concerning the works that he had performed would be
compared with later exhibitions of the same power. He foresaw that the
"Spirit of truth" would eventually discover the laws pertaining to
his doctrines and his works, and that a comparison of the testimony
of his followers with the discoveries of science would demonstrate
to the world the essential truth of his history and of his spiritual
philosophy.

I shall now briefly point out a few of the more salient features of the
history of Jesus which bear upon the subject under consideration, and
shall undertake to show, first, how the discoveries of modern science
confirm the accounts of his physical manifestations; and secondly, how
they confirm the essential features of his spiritual philosophy.

The prominent feature of his physical manifestations consisted in
healing the sick; and in the discussion of the first division of the
subject I shall confine myself to the consideration of that part of his
career.

The first proposition bearing upon the subject is, that Jesus Christ
was the first who correctly formulated the exact conditions necessary
and indispensable to the exercise of the power to heal the sick by
psychic methods.

The second proposition is, that the conditions which he declared to be
necessary to enable him to exercise that power are the same conditions
which are indispensable to-day.

These propositions will be considered together.

The condition which he declared to be essential, not only in the
patient, but in the healer, is embraced in the one word _faith_. That
word, more than any other, expresses the whole law of human felicity
and power in this world, and of salvation in the world to come. It is
that attribute of mind which elevates man above the level of the brute,
and gives him dominion over all the physical world. It is the essential
element of success in every field of human endeavor. It constitutes the
power of the human soul. When Jesus of Nazareth proclaimed its potency
from the hill-tops of Palestine he gave to mankind the key to health
and to heaven, and earned the title of Saviour of the World.

It would seem to be a work of supererogation to cite particular
passages of the Scriptures or to employ argument to prove the
correctness of the proposition that Jesus considered faith in the
patient a necessary condition of his recovery. The proposition is
plainly true, and it has been so understood by all intelligent readers
of the New Testament until very recent times. There are those,
however, who now seem to fear that Jesus will be robbed of his glory,
and reduced to the common level of mankind, if it is shown that the
conditions necessary to the success of the mental healer of to-day
are the same as they were nineteen hundred years ago. In other words,
they endeavor to show that Jesus did not operate in harmony with the
laws which he proclaimed, but independently and in defiance of the
very principles of nature which it was his mission to illustrate and
expound. He did not pretend to establish any new law of nature, but
to teach mankind that which had been in existence from the beginning,
to illustrate it in his life, and to sanction it by his death. He did
not teach his disciples the principles and laws involved in healing the
sick, and at the same time violate himself. He taught them his methods
of healing, and sent them into the world to imitate his example. When
they failed, as they occasionally did fail, he reproved them for
neglecting his teachings, and upbraided them for their want of faith.
When the lunatic was brought to him, and he was told that his disciples
had failed to cast out the devil which afflicted the patient, Jesus
exclaimed: "O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be
with you? how long shall I suffer you?" After he had cast out the
devil, the disciples asked him why they could not cast him out.

    "And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I
    say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall
    say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall
    remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you."[43]

His expression concerning their power to remove mountains doubtless had
reference to the fact that ponderable bodies can be moved by subjective
power, under proper conditions, as has been frequently demonstrated in
later times.

Many passages might be quoted illustrating the proposition that faith
was a necessary condition in the minds of the apostolic healers; but it
is believed that no one will gainsay the proposition. It may be said,
however, that Jesus did not require faith in himself to enable him to
heal the sick,--that he healed independently of that law. The obvious
answer is that he had that knowledge of his power which transcended
faith: or rather, that he had the faith which came from knowledge of
that power. In the sense that faith ceases where knowledge begins,
he may be said not to have had faith. His disciples arrived at that
point after an experimental demonstration of their power; and so may
we all do likewise. As I have shown in a former chapter, subjective
faith may be acquired in direct contradiction to objective faith
or belief; but after an experimental demonstration of the power of
subjective faith, objective belief no longer sets up an auto-suggestion
against it. It then becomes knowledge, and in that sense it ceases
to be faith. Nevertheless, in the sense in which it is said that the
healer must have faith to enable him to heal the sick, he has faith. In
that sense it cannot be disputed that Jesus had faith in his power to
heal the sick. It is thought, therefore, that enough has been said to
demonstrate the proposition that faith was a requisite element in the
healers of Jesus' time. Certainly no one will dispute the proposition
that it is necessary in the psychic healers of to-day. We may consider,
therefore, that two points in our argument are established,--namely
(1), that the conditions requisite in psychic healers of this day are
identical with those required in apostolic times; and (2) that Jesus
was the first to proclaim the principle and to exemplify it in his
works. The difference is not in principle, but in degree of power.

It is said, however, that Jesus did not require faith in those whom he
healed. The first answer to this proposition is that there is nothing
in his recorded words to warrant the statement. He never professed to
be able to heal independently of that condition. On the contrary, all
his expressions on that subject lead to the inevitable conclusion that
faith was a necessary condition of the patient's mind to enable him to
effect a cure. It may be true that in some cases he said nothing about
it; but this is only negative evidence, and of the weakest kind, in
view of what he _did_ say on the numerous occasions when circumstances
required an utterance on the subject.

A striking instance of healing, and a fair example of his utterances on
this subject, is recorded in Matthew ix. 28, 29, 30:--

    "And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him:
    and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this?
    They said unto him, Yea, Lord.

    "Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it
    unto you.

    "And their eyes were opened."

Jesus was not in the habit of uttering idle words, or words without
significance. In all history there is not an example recorded of a man
whose reticence was so marked. Every word he uttered conveyed some
important lesson to humanity. It does not seem probable that he would
question those poor blind men regarding their faith in his power,
unless their faith was an important factor in the case.

The case of the ten lepers of Samaria and Galilee has been cited as
an instance of his healing in the absence of faith on the part of the
patients:--

    "And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men
    that were lepers, which stood afar off:

    "And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have
    mercy on us.

    "And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go show yourselves unto
    the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were
    cleansed.

    "And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and
    with a loud voice glorified God,

    "And fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he
    was a Samaritan.

    "And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where
    are the nine?

    "There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this
    stranger.

    "And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee
    whole."[44]

It has been said that this passage shows that nine out of the ten were
healed without the exercise of faith on their part, because he said to
but one of them, "Thy faith hath made thee whole." The obvious answer
to this is that he had no opportunity to say it to the rest. There was
but one of the ten who exhibited sufficient gratitude to return and
give thanks for what had been done for him. That the rest were healed
in the same way is obvious. That they all had faith in his power is
evidenced by the fact that they cried to him from afar off, "Jesus,
Master, have mercy on us." I submit that that is not the language of
doubt.

Again, it has been said that in the cases where he raised from the dead
there could have been no faith on the part of the dead. This is by all
odds the strongest case that could be cited in support of the theory
that faith was not required. But the objection instantly vanishes when
we remember that it is the faith of the subjective mind, or the soul,
that is required; and that the belief of the objective mind has only
a limited control, governed by circumstances.[45] When Jesus raised a
person from the dead, the conditions were, in one sense of the word,
the best possible to enable him to obtain complete mastery of the soul
of the deceased by the power of suggestion. The objective senses were
in complete abeyance, the body was dead; consequently, there was no
objective auto-suggestion of doubt possible. The soul, in obedience to
the universal law, was amenable to control by the mysterious power of
suggestion. Jesus, possessing more subjective power than any one who
has ever lived, commanded the soul of the deceased to return to its
earthly tenement. He may not have employed objective language when he
issued his command, but his soul, in perfect telepathic communion with
that of the deceased, and dominating it as only he could dominate the
souls of men, issued his mental mandate to the departing soul to return
to the body and resume its functions. That command it must obey, and
it did obey. There was no law of nature violated or transcended. On
the contrary, the whole transaction was in perfect obedience to the
laws of nature. He understood the law perfectly, as no one before him
understood it; and in the plenitude of his power he applied it where
the greatest good could be accomplished.

The case of Jairus' daughter is a perfect illustration of the fact
that he perfectly understood the mental conditions necessary to enable
him to raise her from the dead. Jairus, one of the rulers of the
synagogue, besought Jesus to come to his house and heal his daughter,
who was lying at the point of death. Jesus readily complied with the
request; but before they arrived, word was sent to Jairus that the
damsel was dead:--

    "While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's
    house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou
    the Master any further?

    "As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the
    ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.

    "And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and
    John the brother of James.

    "And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and
    seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.

    "And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado,
    and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.

    "And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them all out,
    he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that
    were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

    "And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, _Talitha
    cumi_; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.

    "And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of
    the age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great
    astonishment.

    "And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and
    commanded that something should be given her to eat."[46]

There are several points embraced in the above which are deserving of
serious consideration.

The first is that Christ perfectly understood the importance of
securing for his patient a favorable mental environment. To that end
he endeavored to quiet the fears of the father, and to impress upon
him the necessity of holding his mind in the attitude of faith and
confidence. The father was necessarily in telepathic rapport with the
daughter, and it was important that he should not impress his doubts
and fears upon her departing soul. The injunction was, therefore, laid
upon him, "Be not afraid, only believe."

He also understood the value of a positive mental force surrounding
the deceased, which would be in perfect harmony with his own force and
purpose. To that end, he selected three of the most powerful of his
followers, Peter, James, and John, to be present in the chamber of
death, and he suffered no one else to follow him. He kept the multitude
of unbelievers as far away as possible. When he came to the house and
saw the tumult, and heard the weeping and wailing of the friends and
relatives of the deceased, he not only put them all out of the room,
but sought to quiet their fears by the only way possible, which was by
assuring them that "the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth." These words
possess a double meaning, a double purpose; and some have supposed that
they implied that the damsel was only in a cataleptic trance. It is
probable, however, that they were uttered in the sense that the soul
never dies. It will be remembered that he used the same expression in
regard to Lazarus, but afterwards explained his meaning by declaring
that Lazarus was really dead in the common acceptation of the term.
His object in using that expression was twofold. First, he desired to
quiet the fears and stop the lamentations of the friends and relatives,
for the obvious reason that their hopeless wailing must operate as a
strong adverse suggestion to the soul of the patient. The only way that
could be accomplished was by an assurance that the damsel was not dead.
Secondly, he knew the potency of such a suggestion upon the patient
herself. It was the master-stroke on his part, first, to quiet the
fears of the relatives, and secondly, to fill the departing soul with
the subjective faith necessary to enable him successfully to command it
to return to the body. That this was his object in uttering those words
there can be no reasonable doubt; more especially as it is precisely
what an intelligent mental healer who thoroughly understands the law of
suggestion would do to-day, in the light of recent rediscoveries in the
science which Jesus taught.

Here, then, are seven separate and distinct acts which he performed,
all tending in the one direction:--

1. He inspired the father with faith, because he was in telepathic
rapport with his daughter.

2. He prohibited the multitude of unbelievers from approaching the
house, knowing the adverse influence of an atmosphere of incredulity
and doubt.

3. He took three of his most powerful apostles with him, for the
purpose of surrounding the patient with an atmosphere of faith and
courage.

4. He excluded the weeping friends and relatives from the sick room,
for the same reason that he prevented the multitude from following him.

5. He assured them that the damsel was not dead, for the purpose of
inspiring them with faith and hope in her recovery, and thus adding
another favorable element to the mental environment.

6. By the same words of assurance that the damsel was not dead
he conveyed to her subjective mind the most powerful suggestion
possible,--indeed, the only suggestion applicable to the exigencies of
the case.

7. Having thus secured the best possible conditions, he took the damsel
by the hand, and, by an energetic command, restored her to life.

The sceptic will doubtless interpose the objection that the damsel
could not have been dead, but that it was merely a case of suspended
animation. To this the reply is, first, that it is claimed by
the Eastern adepts that as long as the vital organs of the body
are perfect, it is always possible to compel the soul to return
to its habitation. It is certain that there are many apparently
well-authenticated instances of the performance of the feat even in
the Western hemisphere. The second and most pertinent reply is that
the evidential value of the case is just as great, supposing it to
have been a case of suspended animation. The point is that Jesus could
not have taken the course he did if he had not been in full possession
of the knowledge of the laws pertaining to mental therapeutics. This
one case is demonstrative, first, that he perfectly understood the
laws of telepathy; and secondly, that he fully understood the law
of suggestion. Indeed, Jesus was the first discoverer of that law,
for the word _faith_ is an epitome of the whole law of suggestion.
In short, the internal evidence of the exact truth of this narrative
is demonstrative, in view of what is now known of the laws of mental
healing. For, in his day, no one but he knew enough about those laws
to enable him to carry out the minute details of the process; and, _a
fortiori_, no one could have written the narrative in the absence of an
exemplar.

There are two other points embraced in the last paragraph of the
narrative which must not be overlooked.

    "And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and
    commanded that something should be given her to eat."

The injunction of secrecy contained in the first part of the paragraph
was often laid upon those whom he healed. "See thou tell no man" was
an injunction which was often repeated by him in the course of his
career as a healer of the sick, and it still further illustrates his
wonderful knowledge of the science of mental therapeutics. The reason
for so charging his beneficiaries has only recently been discovered.
It is this: When a person is suddenly healed by mental processes, it
becomes a matter of the first importance that he should not talk on
the subject in public, or to persons who are sceptical. The reason is
that sceptical persons are apt to dispute the facts or to ridicule
the idea of healing by such processes. They often say to a patient:
"You have been cured by exciting your imagination, and the disease
will return as soon as the excitement is over." This constitutes a
suggestion which must act unfavorably, and it often causes the patient
to look for the predicted return of the disease. His fears are aroused
by imperceptible degrees; and if the suggestion is persisted in, the
fears will eventually be realized. A person must needs be well grounded
in the faith, and well versed in the science, to resist the insidious
influence of an unfavorable suggestion constantly reiterated by his
sceptical friends. It is, therefore, of the highest importance that the
injunction of Christ should be observed. That he did not utter those
words idly, and without a full knowledge of the principles involved,
cannot be doubted.

"And he commanded that something should be given her to eat." These
words show merely that he did not despise the ordinary means of
imparting vigor to the wasted frame. As we have remarked in a former
chapter, he did not hesitate to employ material remedies in connection
with, and auxiliary to, his occult power. The mental healers of to-day
would do well to profit by the example of the Master, especially when
their patients are new to the faith, or, from any cause, refractory.

Taken as a whole, the narrative of the raising of Jairus' daughter from
the dead conveys the best lesson in mental therapeutics which has ever
been given to mankind. No mental healer of this day, even though he may
be thoroughly versed in all the discoveries of modern science relating
to mental therapeutics, could make it more complete.

Again I repeat that no man who lived in the days of Christ could have
written that narrative except under the inspiration of literal truth.
The scientific knowledge necessary for the production of a fictitious
narrative corresponding to that did not exist in the minds of men
previous to this, the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Up to
this time the knowledge of the scientific principles involved was
confined to one man,--Christ Jesus.

It is noteworthy, in this connection, that Jesus was in the habit of
healing by what is known at this day as "absent treatment;" that is,
healing when at a distance from the patient, and without his knowledge.
The healing of the nobleman's son at Capernaum is a striking example
of this. The nobleman met Jesus at Cana, and besought him to heal his
son, who was at the point of death. Without going near the patient,
Christ said to the nobleman: "Go thy way; thy son liveth." It was
afterwards ascertained that at the same hour the fever left the young
man, and he recovered. The principles involved in absent treatment
have been fully explained in another chapter, and will not be repeated
here; I may remark, however, that the most perfect faith that can
be obtained for therapeutic purposes is that which arises from a
telepathic suggestion to the subjective mind of the patient, when he is
objectively ignorant of the fact that anything is being done for him.
It is evident that Jesus fully understood this law, as he did all the
laws of mental therapeutics. The patient in this case was objectively
ignorant of the effort made to heal him; he was, therefore, objectively
passive, and no adverse auto-suggestion was possible. The father also
was full of faith, or he would not have entreated Jesus in such earnest
and pathetic terms to save his son. The conditions were therefore as
perfect as possible for successful absent treatment.

The healing of the centurion's servant was a parallel case. It was on
this occasion that Jesus declared, "I have not found so great faith,
no, not in Israel."

It is needless to multiply instances to illustrate the fact that
Jesus healed by the same law which prevails at this day,--the law of
faith. It seems like arguing a self-evident proposition to show that
he required that condition on the part of the patient to enable him to
heal the sick or to do any mighty work. He never pretended to be able
to dispense with that condition, or to be superior to the law which
he proclaimed to the world. When he said anything about it he always
gave the patients to understand that it was through faith that they
were made whole. The New Testament is full of such expressions as: "Thy
faith hath made thee whole;" "According to your faith be it unto you;"
"If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth;"
"Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldst see
the glory of God?" These were neither idle nor untruthful expressions.

On the other hand, it was said of him that at his own home he failed to
do many mighty works, "because of their unbelief." The condition was
absent there, because the people had known him from boyhood, and could
not believe that the "carpenter's son" could do any mighty works.
Besides, as Jesus himself remarked, "a prophet is not without honor
save in his own country."

Faith was the essential prerequisite to the exercise of all the
power that he possessed, and it was the condition precedent to its
inheritance by those who were to come after him.

    "And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall
    they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;

    "They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing,
    it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
    shall recover."[47]

Again,--

    "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works
    that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he
    do; because I go unto my Father."[48]

Christ transmitted his power as a sacred heritage to all mankind.
He had taught his followers, by precept and example, the conditions
necessary to its exercise. Those conditions were expressed in the one
word, _faith_. He never intimated to them that he healed by any other
method than that which he transmitted to them. His example would have
been lost to mankind if it were not illustrative of his precepts. It
would be valueless to the world if it did not illustrate the principles
of the science which he taught. To seek to cast a shade of doubt upon
the verity of his teachings, to intimate a want of harmony between his
practice and his precepts, is to attempt to rob him of the glory and
honor due to one who was able to divine the fundamental laws of our
being, nineteen hundred years before his teachings could be verified
by the inductive process of science, and to destroy the force of the
strongest internal evidence of the truth of sacred history.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 39: Matthew xiii. 10, 11, 13, 15, 34, 35.]

[Footnote 40: John xvi. 12.]

[Footnote 41: John xvi. 13.]

[Footnote 42: John xv. 26, 27.]

[Footnote 43: Matthew xvii. 20.]

[Footnote 44: Luke xvii. 12-19.]

[Footnote 45: See the chapters on Mental Therapeutics.]

[Footnote 46: Mark v. 35-43.]

[Footnote 47: Mark xvi. 17, 18.]

[Footnote 48: John xiv. 12.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CHRIST (_continued_).

    The Word _Faith_ in its Application to Psychic Phenomena.--Its
    Definition.--An Epitome of the Law of Suggestion.--Subjective
    Faith only required.--Illustrative Incident.--The "Spoken
    Word."--Jesus knew the Law, and always acted within its
    Limitations.--Intuitive Perception of the Laws of the Soul.--His
    Manhood and its Limitations.--Our Warranty of Title as Sons of
    God.--Christ constantly controlled by Reason.--His Subjective
    Powers subservient.--The Three Temptations illustrative.--The Great
    Lesson to Mankind.--The Normal Exercise of Subjective Power.--Simon
    the Sorcerer.--Miracle not a Necessary Explanation of the Power of
    Christ.--Conclusions.


In proceeding to make a more direct application of our hypothesis to
the doctrines of Jesus, it will be necessary first to consider the
meaning of the word _faith_ as it was employed by him, and as it must
be understood in its application to all psychic phenomena.

In the common acceptation of the term, faith is "belief; the assent
of the mind to the truth of what is declared by another, resting
solely and implicitly on his authority and veracity; reliance on
testimony."[49] "The faith of the gospel is that emotion of the mind
which is called 'trust,' or 'confidence,' exercised towards the moral
character of God, and particularly of the Saviour."[50]

It is obvious that neither of these definitions properly characterizes
that emotion of the mind, called _faith_, which is the necessary
prerequisite condition of the mind of a person to enable him to confer
or to receive the benefits of psychic power.

It has been shown in a former chapter that the faith necessary to
enable a person to be healed by mental processes is subjective faith;
that is, the faith of the subjective mind, or soul. It has been shown
that this faith may be entertained by the subjective mind in positive
opposition to the faith, or belief, of the objective mind,--that it
may be forced, upon the subjective mind in defiance of objective
reason or the evidence of the objective senses. It is not deemed
necessary, therefore, to enter at this time into a full discussion of
this branch of the subject, and the reader is referred to the chapters
on psycho-therapeutics. In this view of the question it is obvious
that the definition of the word _faith_ must be revised if we would
understand it as Christ understood it, and make it conform to the facts
demonstrated by modern science. In other words, we must define that
particular kind of faith which pertains to the development and exercise
of psychic power,--that faith of which Christ was the first to proclaim
the necessity and define the attributes.

Faith, therefore, in the sense in which Jesus employed it, may be
defined as the assent of the soul, or subjective mind, to the truth of
what is declared to be true.

In other words, faith is that emotion of the human soul which consists
in the unhesitating acceptance and belief in the absolute verity of a
suggestion.

As has been frequently stated before, the belief of the subjective
mind in the verity of a suggestion made to it is the essential and
never-failing law of its being. If the suggestion made to it is not
counteracted by an auto-suggestion proceeding from the objective mind
of the individual, it will always be unhesitatingly accepted. If it is
controverted by auto-suggestion, the strongest suggestion must prevail.
This law is universal. It frequently happens that a therapeutic
suggestion is counteracted by auto-suggestion. The latter may arise
from intense prejudice, or from natural scepticism regarding phenomena
not understood. It is, however, comparatively easy to overcome an
auto-suggestion, in the treatment of disease, for the patient is
generally anxious to be cured, and is willing to assume a passive state
of mind; and this is generally all that is necessary. Moreover, the
subjective mind, ever on the alert for any means of preserving the
life or health of the individual, will readily accept a therapeutic
suggestion if there is no active counter auto-suggestion. If the healer
understands the law of auto-suggestion, and advises his patient that he
can overcome the effect of objective unbelief by a simple assertion of
belief, salutary results all the more readily follow.

A remarkable instance illustrating this principle occurred in the
history of Jesus. It was in the case of the man who brought his son
to be healed, who was afflicted with a "dumb spirit." He had gone to
Jesus' disciples, who failed to effect a cure. In despair, he appealed
to the Master, saying:--

    "If thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us.

    "Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are
    possible to him that believeth.

    "And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with
    tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief."[51]

Whereupon Jesus rebuked the foul spirit and commanded it to come out of
the boy, "and enter no more into him." And the boy was instantly healed.

Now, the whole circumstances surrounding this case were calculated
to render the father sceptical concerning the power of Jesus to heal
his son. He had gone to the disciples, and they had failed. When he
appealed to Jesus he said: "If thou canst do any thing, have compassion
on us, and help us." This expression plainly implied a doubt. After
Jesus had explained that belief was a necessary condition of success,
the father cried out: "Lord, I believe; help _thou_ mine unbelief."
This expression plainly indicated a want of objective faith. But he
spoke the words, "I believe," and then intimated to Jesus that his
real belief depended upon him. He uttered the words "I believe" in
pursuance of an earnest desire to comply with the conditions imposed,
and that was sufficient. These words constituted an auto-suggestion
from his objective mind to his subjective mind; and Jesus was satisfied
with that compliance with his demand for faith, and he instantly healed
the sufferer. He knew the law, and was fully aware that any lingering
objective doubt remaining in the father's objective mind could not
prevail against the "spoken word" of faith.

This case is also illustrative of the principle discussed in the
previous chapter; namely, the desirability of having a favorable mental
environment, especially in cases where the objective mind of the
patient could not be appealed to. The boy was in a state of complete
objective insensibility. The father was the only one present who was
in telepathic rapport with him. Hence the importance of impressing
the father's subjective mind with faith, to the end that his mental
condition might be impressed upon the subjective mind of the son, and
by that means exert a favorable influence upon the latter by telepathic
suggestion. In this case the father's spoken word of belief was a more
potent suggestion than his objective doubts, and the son's subjective
mind, ever alert, seized upon the suggestion; and Jesus, by means of a
suggestion uttered in a solemn tone of supreme authority, healed him
instantly.

I do not mean to say that Jesus could not heal in such cases where the
mental environment was unfavorable; but the fact that he took infinite
pains, wherever practicable, to secure the best conditions, shows that
he understood the law and worked within its limitations.

Certain it is that he never performed any of his wonderful works
outside the laws which he proclaimed, nor did he ever intimate that
he could do so. It is true that his biographers did not always relate
the details of the transactions recorded; but it must be remembered
that they wrote at a later day, and may not have been in possession
of all the details. It is, however, a marvellous fact, and one which
constitutes indubitable evidence of the truth of his history, that
in no instance do they relate a single act performed or word spoken
by him, relating to the healing of the sick, that does not reveal
his perfect knowledge of and compliance with the laws which pertain
to mental therapeutics as they are revealed in modern times through
experiment and the processes of inductive reasoning.

There is but one legitimate conclusion, and that is that the
discoveries of modern science demonstrate the essential truth of the
history of the physical manifestations of Jesus.

The next question is, How did it happen that Jesus came into possession
of the knowledge of the true science of mental therapeutics, when no
one else in all the world at that time knew its rudiments? It may
be true, and doubtless it is true, that there were mental healers
before his time, who, by various methods, performed wonderful works in
psycho-therapeutics. But it must be conceded that he was the first who
evinced a true knowledge of the underlying principles of the science.
He it was who first divined the very essence of that science, and
proclaimed it to the world in the one word _faith_. That word embraced
all that it was necessary for the world to know at that time. Faith,
and the means of acquiring it, is the substance of all that he taught
to his disciples concerning the means of healing the sick; and it was
all that was necessary to enable them to imitate his example and to
transmit the power to those who should come after them. To use his own
language, it was all that they could bear. It was the exoteric science
of mental healing. The esoteric doctrine he reserved for the time
when mankind, inspired by the "Spirit of truth," which he promised,
should be able to discover it for themselves. His was the "dispensation
of faith." The "dispensation of knowledge" was yet to come. That he
was in possession of the knowledge of the underlying principles of
the whole science of mental healing is all but self-evident. No man
without that knowledge could have done what he did to secure the most
favorable conditions for the exercise of his power. It required a full
comprehension of the law of suggestion, a thorough knowledge of the
law of telepathy, a complete realization of the dual nature of the
mind of man, and the power of the soul over the functions of the body,
to enable him to take the seven steps preparatory to the raising of
Jairus' daughter from the dead. If he had failed in that attempt, his
preparatory steps to that end would nevertheless have demonstrated his
knowledge of the laws which pertain to healing by psychic power.

The theologian will find a ready-made answer to the question, How did
Jesus come into possession of knowledge which it has taken nineteen
hundred years of scientific research to verify? His answer will be:
"By direct inspiration from God; by virtue of his being the Son of
God,--one with the Father." I shall not attempt to gainsay this
proposition, but shall endeavor to show that it is true in the highest
and best sense of the expression. In doing so I shall not discuss the
question of his miraculous birth; I leave that to the theologian. I
desire simply to show that, whatever may have been the conditions of
his birth, he took upon himself the nature and attributes of humanity,
and subjected himself to its physical conditions and limitations. In
other words, his wondrous works were performed within the domain of
the same natural laws which limit the powers of all mankind. He was a
man, and merely a man, in his physical life and manifestations, and
differed from other men only in the degree of his faculties and in the
possession of the intuitive power of perception of the laws of the soul
in its relations to the physical world and to God.

I have shown that Jesus did not find it necessary to go outside the
pale of natural law for the power to perform his mighty works, that he
not only operated within the domain of natural law, but even avowed and
proclaimed the fact to the world. It remains for me to show that his
knowledge of those laws was obtained through the operation of natural
law, and without the necessity of our invoking the aid of miraculous
power.

It will be remembered that in a former chapter of this book it was
shown that the subjective mind, or soul, of man possesses the inherent
power to _perceive_, under certain exceptional conditions not clearly
defined, those operations of nature which are governed by fixed laws.
It was by means of this power of instantaneous perception of the laws
of numbers that Zerah Colburn, before his objective education was
sufficient to enable him to understand the power of the nine digits,
was enabled instantly to state the cube root of any number that was
given him. He could never give any explanation of the means by which
the result was accomplished. It was beyond his own objective powers of
comprehension. He simply perceived the truth.

It was this power that enabled Blind Tom to perceive the laws of the
harmony of sounds. He was without objective education, and devoid of
the capacity to acquire one; but from the moment when he discovered an
old piano in an unused room of his master's mansion, he was able to
improvise beautiful melodies, and to reproduce with remarkable accuracy
a piece of music after once hearing it played.

This is a power which transcends reason, and is independent of
induction. Instances of its development might be multiplied
indefinitely, but it is not necessary in this connection to enlarge
upon a fact which will receive the instant assent of the intelligent
reader when his attention is called to it. In this objective existence
of ours, trammelled as is the human soul by its fleshly tabernacle, it
is comparatively rare that conditions are favorable to the development
of the phenomena. But enough is known to warrant the conclusion that
when the soul is released from its objective environment it will be
enabled to perceive all the laws of its being, to "see God as he is,"
by the perception of the laws which he has instituted. It is the
knowledge of this power which demonstrates our true relationship to
God, which confers the warranty of our right to the title of "sons
of God," and confirms our inheritance of our rightful share of his
attributes and powers,--our heirship of God, our joint heirship with
Jesus Christ.

It was this power of perception of truth without the necessity of
resorting to the slow and laborious processes of induction that enabled
Christ to divine the whole law of mental therapeutics. Science, after
nineteen hundred years of induction, has demonstrated the fact that
he perceived the whole law and applied it with scientific accuracy.
The most marvellous part of it all is that the account of it has been
preserved and transmitted with such fidelity of scientific detail.

Leaving out of consideration the question of the alleged miraculous
conception and birth of Christ, it is certain that he was exceptionally
endowed, morally, physically, and mentally. No man ever before
possessed the subjective power that he did. And yet, unlike most of
those of modern times who are exceptionally endowed with that power,
his objective faculties and his subjective powers seem to have been
harmoniously balanced and developed. This is shown by his perfect
moral character and attributes. It is demonstrated by the fact that
his subjective mind was always under the perfect control of his
reason. In these respects he presents a most striking contrast to the
great majority of persons, especially of the present day, who are in
possession of great subjective powers. Not clearly understanding the
relationship between their objective and subjective faculties, they
allow the latter to usurp control. They realize the wonderful powers
and attributes of the human soul, but they fail to understand its
equally wonderful, but necessary, limitations. They realize that the
soul is "God in us," and naturally conclude that it is endowed with all
god-like attributes. They fail to realize that while it is imprisoned
in the body, it must be limited and controlled by its objective
environment. They cannot understand that the soul, as long as it is
amenable to control by the power of suggestion, must necessarily be
limited in its powers of reasoning. Most important of all, they fail to
understand that the soul is the seat of all human passion and emotion;
that, uncontrolled by objective reason, it runs riot at the bidding of
every immoral suggestion; that his objective powers of reason were
given to man to enable him to train the soul for eternity,--to work out
his own salvation.

The whole life of Christ is an illustration of the fact that he knew
the law, and, knowing it, employed his subjective powers in their
legitimate domain, and never suffered himself to be tempted to allow
them to usurp the throne of reason.

The account of his temptations in the wilderness is a striking
illustration of this fact, and it teaches a lesson to humanity of
the utmost practical importance. Like all the recorded events of his
life, it is intended to illustrate a great principle. It is not a
mere literal history of an episode in his career, in which a personal
devil figured at a disadvantage. To suppose that he could be tempted
by such a devil as has been pictured by some, would be to degrade him
below the level of common humanity. But to interpret the story as a
symbolical vision appearing to Christ after his forty days' fast in the
wilderness, is to find in it one of the most important lessons ever
conveyed to humanity.

He was just entering upon his ministry. He had shut himself out from
the world for forty days, preparatory to entering upon his work. He
employed his time in silent contemplation and earnest prayer for
strength and power and Divine guidance. He fasted all this time, as a
physical preparation necessary to the attainment of the full powers of
the soul. At the end of that time, conscious of the full possession of
subjective power such as no man ever before attained, contemplating
the career upon which he was about to enter, realizing all its
possibilities for good and all its opportunities for the attainment of
personal power and aggrandizement, the temptation came. His subjective
mind was the tempter. Reasoning deductively from the consciousness of
transcendent power, and selfishly, in obedience to the laws of its
being, it pictured to the imagination of Jesus all the possibilities
in store for him if he chose to exercise his power for selfish ends.
The first temptation appealed to his sense of personal necessity. He
was poor. "He had not where to lay his head" at night. He was dependent
upon the bounty of his friends for his daily food. In the pursuit of
his mission he had the prospect before him of being often thrown among
strangers hostile to his faith; and his immediate necessities, after
his forty days' fast, gave intensity to the temptation and suggested
its concrete form. It came in the words: "If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread." Jesus understood the vision,
not only as pertaining to his present necessities, but, in its broader
sense, as a temptation to the exercise of his power for selfish
personal ends, for the promotion of his individual ease and comfort.

It was then that his objective power of reason asserted itself, and he
refused to allow his subjective mind to usurp control. He knew that
his mission on earth could not be promoted by the employment of his
subjective powers for the purpose of ministering to his own selfish
wants. Therefore he spurned a temptation which, if yielded to, would
weaken the altruistic sentiment which was regnant in him.

His next temptation followed the first in deductive logical sequence.
It came in the form of a symbolical vision, in which he saw himself
placed upon a pinnacle of the temple, and a voice said: "If thou be
the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give
his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear
thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." This
suggestion was a sequence to the other, for it was as much as to say:
"If you wish to heal the sick, exhibit your power in public, where all
men can see and know that you have the power to preserve your own life.
Then will you receive the plaudits of the multitude, and their faith in
you will be made strong."

His answer to this, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God," conveys,
in one brief sentence, a valuable and important lesson pertaining to
the exercise of subjective power,--a lesson the importance of which,
in its application to the science of mental therapeutics, cannot be
overestimated. In its general sense it means that subjective power
should never be exercised for purposes of mere display. The tempter
appealed to his love of approbation, his pride of power, his desire
for the plaudits of the multitude, tempered by the insidious suggestion
that, by the public exhibition of his power, he could all the more
readily secure the confidence of the people and promote the object of
his mission. He had refused to exercise his power for the purpose of
securing his own ease and comfort, for the reason that his mission,
in part, was to relieve the sufferings of others; and now he was
tempted to promote that object by a public display in the presence
of an admiring multitude. There was nothing morally wrong in either
suggestion. It is not wrong, _per se_, to produce bread, or to take
measures to secure our own comfort. Nor is it wrong, in itself, to give
a public exhibition for a good purpose; but from the standpoint from
which he viewed it, both were wrong in principle and practice. The
first would interfere with, and endanger the success of, his mission;
the second would be trifling with the gift of God. It would be a wanton
exercise of a power which is given, not for idle display, but for the
promotion of the highest good of mankind, when exercised within its
legitimate sphere.

But there was another and a more potent reason still for his refusal to
exercise his power for purposes of display. It is a reason which the
world is just beginning to appreciate. It is a reason which finds its
justification in the fundamental principles pertaining to the exercise
of psychic power. As in all the words and deeds of Christ, there was
a scientific principle underlying the sententious expression employed
in his rejection of the second temptation. This principle applies with
special force to the employment of psychic power to the healing of the
sick.

It has been shown in a former chapter that the normal functions of the
subjective entity consist in the performance of those acts which tend
to the preservation and perpetuation of the human race. It has also
been shown that all exercise of subjective power outside that domain
is abnormal, and, consequently, injurious. As this subject has been
sufficiently enlarged upon elsewhere, it need only be mentioned here.
It was this principle which Christ desired to illustrate and enforce,
and he never neglected an opportunity to do so by precept or example.
As before remarked, it applies with special force to the exercise of
that power for the purpose of healing, and it teaches a most important
and salutary lesson both to healer and patient. It is this: that no one
should ever presume to violate the laws of health for the mere purpose
of showing to himself or to others that he has the psychic power to
heal himself. A necessary or an unavoidable act may be performed which
is ordinarily injurious to health, or even dangerous to life, and
psychic power may be invoked to avert the natural consequences; but
when one wantonly violates the laws of health for the mere purposes of
display, he is apt to find that the power to avert the consequences has
deserted him. He has violated the commandment uttered by the Saviour on
that occasion: "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." He has violated
a law of nature, a law of psycho-therapeutics, which Christ thus
sententiously formulated for the guidance of all who should come after
him. Like all the other laws which he revealed to mankind, it applies
with equal force now as it did when he first promulgated it nineteen
hundred years ago; and it may safely be said that there is no one act
of his life that more clearly discloses his perfect knowledge of the
laws which pertain to the normal exercise of subjective power than his
rejection of the three temptations.

His next temptation came in the form of a symbolical vision, in which
he saw himself, figuratively, upon the top of "an exceeding high
mountain," from which he could view "the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them."

The other temptations attacked his usefulness as a man. The third
was directed against his spiritual mission also. It came in a more
insidious form than either the first or second, for its promises
included both. It was equivalent to saying: "You see the wide world
before you, with all its comforts, its honors and glory, its wealth and
splendor and power. All these can you acquire by the exercise of that
potent force with which you have been invested."

    "Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is
    written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
    thou serve."

Again had reason triumphed over the natural, instinctive suggestions of
his human nature. Again had he refused to employ the power with which
he had been invested, outside the limits of its legitimate domain.
Again had he taught a lesson to humanity by illustrating the normal
relations between the objective and subjective faculties,--between
reason and instinct. In his rejection of the last temptation he did
more,--he exhibited his entire devotion to the objects of his spiritual
mission. He had come into the world, taking upon himself the yoke and
burden of common humanity. He was circumscribed by the limitations of
its laws, municipal, ecclesiastical, and natural. He willingly obeyed
them all. His lot was cast among a poor and humble people. He must
mingle familiarly with them if he would impress them with the grand and
awful simplicity of his philosophy. If he placed himself above the laws
of the land, he would be proscribed. If he transcended or violated the
laws of nature, his example would be lost to common humanity. If he
sought the worldly wealth and secular power which was within his grasp,
he would be feared, but not loved, by the people whose destiny it was
to be the first recipients of his teachings, the beneficiaries of his
power, the witnesses of his example, the recorders of his testament.

This digression from the main point of our present argument seemed
necessary in order to show how perfectly the subjective mind of Jesus
was under the control of his objective reason. Besides, there is no
one act of his life that more clearly discloses his perfect knowledge
of the laws which pertain to the normal exercise of subjective power,
and his firm determination never to exercise that power outside of its
legitimate domain, or for purposes of private advantage or emolument,
than his rejection of the three temptations. That these principles
actuated him is shown by his every act and word. That he taught them
in their purity to his apostles is shown in the indignant reply of
Peter to Simon the sorcerer, who offered a money consideration to
Peter to purchase the secret of his power. Knowing that Simon was a
professional magician, and suspecting that he desired only to add to
his _r�pertoire_ of stock exhibitions of occult powers, the apostle
rebuked him in these memorable words:--

    "Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the
    gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou hast neither part
    nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of
    God."[52]

I now recur to the main question under discussion: How did Jesus
obtain the scientifically accurate and exclusive knowledge of the laws
pertaining to the exercise of subjective power, of which every act and
word of his demonstrates his possession?

The ready and easy answer of unreasoning faith is, "Miracle." But is
it necessary in this case to invoke the aid of such an explanation?
Clearly not. Without entering upon the discussion of the vexed question
of the possible existence of the power to work a miracle, it must be
held as a self-evident proposition that we should never convert an
event into a miracle when there is a satisfactory explanation within
the known laws of nature.

In this case the necessity does not exist to presuppose a miraculous
intervention of Divine power, since God has given to every human
soul the inherent power, under certain conditions, to _perceive_ and
comprehend the fixed laws of nature. What those conditions are, we may
never know. That they exist, the events within common knowledge amply
demonstrate. That they are exceptional, goes without saying. No one
man has ever been able to perceive all the laws during his objective
existence. One perceives the law of numbers, another that of the
harmony of sounds, another that of the harmony of colors, and so on.

Jesus Christ perceived spiritual law.

That his intuitions were scientifically exact, so far as they pertained
to the subject of his physical manifestations in healing the sick,
is amply demonstrated by comparison of what he did and said with the
discoveries of modern science within this, the last quarter of the
nineteenth century.

I have purposely refrained from commenting on the accounts of his
physical manifestations other than those of healing the sick, for the
reason that science in the Western world as yet furnishes little or
no data for comparison. I cannot refrain, however, from calling the
attention of the reader to the fact that a few years ago sceptics were
just as incredulous regarding the biblical accounts of Christ's healing
the sick as they still are regarding his feeding of the multitude
on the five loaves and the two fishes. It must be remembered that
experimental knowledge of the occult sciences is still in its infancy
in the Western world, and that what is regarded as a miracle to-day may
be known to be a scientific fact to-morrow. In the mean time enough is
known to the scientific world to-day to demonstrate the essential truth
of the physical history of Jesus of Nazareth. It remains to show what
light the scientific discoveries of the nineteenth century shed upon
his spiritual philosophy.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 49: Webster.]

[Footnote 50: Dwight.]

[Footnote 51: Mark ix. 22-24.]

[Footnote 52: Acts viii. 20, 21.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXV.

THE SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    Even now, after eighteen centuries of Christianity, we may be
    involved in some enormous error, of which the Christianity of the
    future will make us ashamed.--VINET.

    The Necessity of Signs and Wonders.--Christ's Work was for all
    Time.--His Consummate Wisdom.--Signs and Wonders as Evidence.--His
    Perception of Spiritual Laws.--The Perceptive Powers of the
    Soul.--Propositions.--Presumptive Evidence of his Knowledge of
    Spiritual Laws.--Condition precedent to Immortality.--Faith the
    Essential Condition.--The Declarations of Christ.--He meant
    just what He said.--The Doctrines of the Church.--Literal
    Extinction of the Soul through Unbelief.--Belief essential
    to Salvation.--Belief will not avert the Consequences of
    Sin.--Inherent Probabilities.--The Conscious Existence of the
    Soul.--The Law of Suggestion applied.--Scepticism constitutes a
    Fatal Suggestion.--Phenomena of Hypnotism illustrative.--Souls of
    Animals have no Conscious Existence; hence not Immortal.--Christ
    as a Saviour of Souls.--His Doctrine new to the World, but
    scientifically correct.


When Jesus said to the nobleman of Capernaum, "Except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe," he not only correctly summarized the
then existing attitude of the public mind in reference to the doctrines
which he proclaimed, but he declared with prophetic exactitude that
which is as true to-day as it was when he uttered it in Galilee.
He said it, not reproachfully, but as a statement of a condition
inevitable from the nature of things, which must be recognized and
dealt with in a practical manner. The wisdom shown in yielding to the
demand for "signs and wonders" in that day is obvious. Without it
the people could not believe; with it they could not doubt. To them
it was the power of God, working through miracle. It was to them a
sign and symbol of puissance and authority. To doubt the word of one
who was able to work such wonders was to doubt the evidence of their
senses. Without that evidence the spiritual doctrines of Jesus would
have been to them without sanction of authority. Logic and reason
would have been wasted on the people of that age. Their belief that
the signs and wonders were wrought in defiance of natural law was the
only circumstance that could command their respect. Their idea was
that the only way in which God could manifest his power was by some
signal violation of his own laws. To attempt to show them that Christ
healed the sick by a strict observance of natural law would have been
as futile as to attempt to teach a new-born babe the principles of the
differential calculus. To convince them of the fact would be to destroy
their faith in the power of God. Jesus taught them all that they could
understand,--all that it would benefit the world to know in that era of
civilization. He was working, not only for the people of his own time,
but for all future generations. He laid his foundations broad and deep,
and with the most consummate wisdom. He not only conferred the benefits
of his power upon the people of his own race and country, but he left
indubitable evidences of the truth of his history and of his doctrines
for all future generations.

Conceding, for the sake of the argument, that Jesus possessed the power
to work a miracle,--that is, to work outside of the domain of natural
law and in defiance of it,--his consummate wisdom in refraining from
the exercise of that power is now manifest. If he had wrought his
wonders by miracle, only the eye-witnesses of his works would have
been benefited; for there would have been no means provided by which
future generations could verify his history. But if he performed his
works by and through the operations of natural law, it only remains for
science to rediscover that law, in order to demonstrate the truth of
his history. His consummate wisdom is, therefore, manifest in that he
did leave a record, told with such accuracy of detail, that the science
of this generation can verify its truth.

The immediate necessity for showing signs and wonders to his people
was what he declared it to be,--namely, "that they might believe" in
him; that they might be convinced of his power, and have faith in his
declaration.

But he had a grander and a nobler object still than the conversion
of the few people of his own race and country. He foresaw the time
when mankind would not be content to rest its faith upon the dictum
of a history written by obscure and unknown men; when the world would
refuse to believe in the possibility of miracles, and demand a reason
for faith in him, in his works, and in his spiritual doctrines. We
have already seen how amply the truth of the history of his physical
manifestations has been vindicated by the discoveries of modern science.

But he had a more far-reaching wisdom still. It would avail the world
little, simply to know the truth of his physical history, if by that
means he could not demonstrate the truth of his spiritual doctrines
and philosophy. And it is just here that his utterance to the nobleman
of Capernaum applies with equal force to the people of the present
day, "Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe." It is
now apparent that those signs and wonders were as necessary for the
confirmation of the faith of the scientific investigator of to-day as
they were to convince the people of his day that he was invested with
power and authority. Without them there would have been no means by
which we could prove even his probable existence. With them we are put
into possession of data which, by comparison with the known facts of
contemporary science, enable us to predicate with moral certainty his
existence and the essential truth of his history.

They do more. They enable us to know with scientific certainty that
he was in possession of an accurate knowledge of the laws which
pertain to his physical manifestations; and they logically justify us
in the conclusion that by the same means he obtained possession of
a knowledge of the laws which pertain to the conditions of immortal
life. The subject-matter is the same. His physical manifestations
were exhibitions of the powers of the soul. The philosophy of his
psychic power is the philosophy of the soul in its relations to the
physical man. The philosophy of immortality is the philosophy of the
soul in its relations to God. A change in its environment does not
change the nature or attributes of the soul; and hence we may infer
with irresistible logic that Jesus was as correct in his inferences or
knowledge concerning the life beyond as he was scientifically accurate
in his knowledge of the laws of the soul in its relation to its
physical environment.

In discussing the above proposition, the question as to how it was
possible for Jesus to obtain a knowledge of the condition of the
soul after the death of the body will first be considered. It has
already been shown that under certain conditions the soul perceives
with absolute accuracy the fixed laws of nature. It has also been
shown that the soul does not possess during its sojourn in the flesh
the power of inductive reasoning, but that its powers of reasoning
deductively from any suggested premise are marvellous. I have ventured
to use the expression in that connection, that "the subjective mind
reasons deductively with extraordinary acumen." I have not ventured
the assertion that its deductions are infallible, though there is good
reason to believe that under certain conditions the assertion would be
substantially correct. The instances cited of mathematical prodigies
would seem to bear out that assertion. The power of perception in them
must be perfect, or there would be nothing to distinguish them from
other mathematicians. Their answers to mathematical problems, to be
remarkable, must be correct. That they are correct would seem to give
us warrant for the inference that under favorable conditions the powers
of the soul for correct deductive reasoning, or perception of fixed
laws, are perfect. If it is true in mathematics, it must be true in all
other matters governed by fixed laws, especially since all the forces
of nature are correlated, and all are governed by mathematical laws.

It has also been shown that the deductions of the subjective mind are
always logically accurate, even though the premises may be false. Any
one who has had experience in dealing with persons in a hypnotic trance
will bear me out in that statement.

The question now arises, What are the conditions necessary to give
us assurance of infallible deductions from given premises? Before
proceeding to discuss that matter, it is proper to premise that it is
difficult, in dealing with the subtle forces of the subjective mind, to
draw a distinct line between its powers of perception of fixed laws and
its powers of deduction from given premises. Its perceptions seem to be
instantaneous, and to preclude the idea of the employment of any such
processes of reasoning as are known to the logic of objective education.

The distinction seems to be this: If the premises are given from an
extraneous source, in the form of a suggestion, the processes of
deductive reasoning are employed. If the premises are the result of
intuitive perception, the conclusion is also perceived simultaneously.
In such a case the whole law pertaining to the subject-matter is
perceived at once; and it is inconceivable to the finite mind how any
processes of reasoning have been employed. Thus, in the case of Zerah
Colburn, his answers to mathematical problems of the most intricate
character were given instantaneously, and he was never conscious of
employing any process of calculation whatever. Moreover, his answers
were always correct.

Now, whether the processes of deductive reasoning employed by the
subjective mind lead to infallible results, it is not my purpose to
discuss. It is certain that they are marvellously accurate, whether
the premises are true or false; but whether they may be relied upon as
always correct when the premises are true, I am not prepared to say
from the data before me; nor is it important, for my present purpose,
to know.

It is certain, however, that where the powers of perception are
employed, under proper conditions, the conclusions are infallible.

We have now a starting-point from which we may form a correct estimate
of the scientific accuracy of the spiritual philosophy of Jesus.

If we are to concede that his doctrines are true, it is obvious that we
must demonstrate the correctness of the following propositions:---

1. That Jesus was endowed with the power to obtain a perfect knowledge
of spiritual law by perception or intuition.

2. To demonstrate this we must show, (_a_) that his knowledge of
spiritual law was scientifically accurate; and (_b_) that it could not
have been obtained by the ordinary processes of objective education.

3. To show that his knowledge was accurate, it must be demonstrated
that the conclusions arrived at by the inductive processes of modern
science are identical with the doctrines that he proclaimed.

It has already been shown that, as far as his physical manifestations
are concerned, each of the statements embraced in the foregoing
propositions is true. It has been shown that he must have had an
intuitive perception of the law of healing by subjective power, for
the reasons, first, that in the state of occult knowledge existing in
his day, it was impossible that he could have obtained his knowledge
by means of objective education; and, secondly, that his knowledge
of the law of healing was scientifically accurate, as shown by the
fact (_a_) that he proclaimed and constantly reiterated the essential
condition of the exercise of the power of healing precisely as it
is known at the present day; (_b_) that he constantly practised by
the methods known at the present day to be the best; (_c_) that he
surrounded himself and his patients with the best attainable aids to
the exercise of his powers,--precisely such aids, the utility of which
has been demonstrated by modern practice; and (_d_) that he constantly
sought to secure the mental environment which is now known to be of the
first importance, if not absolutely essential, to successful mental
healing. In short, it has been shown that he must have understood every
principle and every law of mental therapeutics, the rediscovery of
which has distinguished the present century.

Reasoning, therefore, from the premises which have thus been
established, we have the logical right to infer that he understood all
the laws which pertain to the soul. If he understood the laws which
govern it in its relations to its physical environment, it is fair to
presume that he knew the laws which pertain to its continued existence
after it is freed from the trammels of the flesh. Without any further
proofs, therefore, we have the logical right to consider the one as
presumptive evidence of the other.

If I stopped right here, I might reasonably claim to have established
the fact that the religion of Christ is founded upon a purely
scientific basis. But I do not intend to rest content with mere
presumptive evidence. I propose to show that his knowledge of the
law of immortality did not rest upon inferential deductions from the
facts known by him regarding the relations of the soul to its physical
environment. I propose to show that the world is now in possession of
facts from which we can reason inductively up to the same conclusions
which he proclaimed, _ex cathedra_, as the law of immortality.

Before proceeding to do so, we must first inquire just what he
taught. In doing so I intend to confine myself to the one essential
proposition which he made regarding the condition essential to the
soul's salvation; for I do not propose to be led into a discussion of
the great fabric of doctrinal religion which has been built up since
he ascended to the Father. I leave that to the theologian. What I
intend to show is, that, viewed from a purely scientific standpoint,
the declaration which he made regarding the condition precedent to the
salvation of the soul is necessarily true.

The first question, therefore, is, What did Jesus declare to be the
one essential condition necessary to the attainment of immortal life?
When I say, "necessary to the _attainment_ of immortal life," I mean
literally what I say; for I hold that if there is one principle
laid down by the Master that is more clearly defined than any
other, it is contained in his declaration, so often repeated, that
faith--_belief_--is the one essential condition precedent to the
continued life of the soul after the death of the body; and that, in
the absence of belief in immortality, the soul itself will necessarily
perish. That this was his doctrine, literally interpreted, no one will
deny. That he meant exactly what he said, I shall attempt to show. That
his declarations to that effect were statements of a scientific truth,
I shall attempt to demonstrate by the process of inductive reasoning
from facts known to modern science.

Before proceeding with the main argument, I hasten to say that the
doctrine of future rewards and punishments will be left untouched.
That question will stand just where it has always stood,--for each
one to decide for himself according to his own interpretation of the
Scriptures on that point, or his own sense of Divine Justice. I shall
not even attempt to destroy the comfort and consolation which many
good persons seem to derive from their belief in eternal fire. My
only object is to show, from a purely scientific standpoint, that the
history and essential doctrines of Jesus are confirmed by the facts and
necessary inductions of modern science, and, incidentally, to harmonize
certain passages of the New Testament which, through misinterpretation,
have seemed to be at variance.

According to the Gospel of Saint John, the first declaration by Jesus
of his doctrine of immortality was made to Nicodemus in the following
words:--

    "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must
    the Son of Man be lifted up:

    "That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
    eternal life.

    "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
    that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
    everlasting life."[53]

Again, in John vi. 40, 47, he makes the same declaration in the
following clear-cut sentences:--

    "And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
    seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life....

    "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath
    everlasting life."

Again:--

    "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and
    believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not
    come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life."[54]

    "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me,
    though he were dead, yet shall he live:

    "And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."[55]

Other passages might be quoted to the same effect, but these must
suffice.

The question now is, Did Jesus mean just what he said; or were these
idle words, having no significance taken in their literal sense? Jesus
was not in the habit of uttering idle words, or of making statements
that did not contain the elements of eternal truth. If these are
exceptions, they are the only ones recorded in his history. I hold that
they are not exceptions, but that they are authoritative statements of
a literal scientific truth.

I have already shown that in formulating the doctrine of faith as
the essential condition prerequisite to successful healing, he gave
utterance to a scientific principle which it has taken nineteen hundred
years for the world to understand and appreciate. It is equally true
that, in formulating the proposition that _belief_ is the essential
prerequisite to the attainment of immortality, he gave words to a
scientific principle of far greater importance than the other.

I am aware that one portion of the Christian Church believes that by
the words "eternal life" Jesus meant that reward in heaven which is
promised to the just, and that by "eternal death" he simply meant
the punishment which the wicked must undergo for their sins. On the
other hand, there are those of the Church who hold that the literal
death of the soul is the punishment meted out to all who die in their
sins, while "eternal life" is the reward promised to all who are good.
Neither of these sects has, however, satisfactorily explained to
unbelievers why it is that belief or unbelief enters as a factor in the
case, since man is not supposed to be able to command his belief.

It is to the reconciliation of these conflicting theories that I shall
now address myself.

The first proposition of my theory is that the death, or practical
extinction, of the soul as a conscious entity is the necessary result
of unbelief in immortality.

The second proposition is that the soul, having attained immortality
through belief, is then subject to the law of rewards and punishments
"according to the deeds done in the body."

The same propositions are more sententiously expressed in Romans ii.
12: "For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without
law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law."

In other words, the condition precedent to the attainment of
immortality, or salvation,--that is, the saving of the soul from
death,--is _belief_. The condition precedent to the attainment of
eternal bliss and the avoidance of the punishments incident to sin, is
righteousness.

It will thus be seen that if it can be shown that these two
propositions are necessarily true, we shall avoid, on the one hand,
the incongruous idea that _belief_ will atone for all sin; and, on the
other, the equally incongruous idea that the extinction of the soul is
the necessary consequence of all sin.

In discussing the first proposition we shall first inquire what are
the inherent probabilities regarding the meaning which Christ attached
to the words which are quoted above. Is it probable, or even possible,
that he could have taught that _belief_ alone was a sufficient
atonement for the sins of the wicked? Knowing, as all must know who
have followed his career and noted his sayings, his utter abhorrence of
all wickedness; reading, as all may read, his sublime code of ethics
and morals, together with the awful maledictions pronounced upon all
violations of that code, and the punishments which he held before the
world as a consequence of sin,--it is simply impossible rationally to
conceive the idea that he taught that all consequences of a life of
sin could be avoided by _belief_. It is a self-evident proposition
that a man may believe in Christ, may believe in immortality, and at
the same time be steeped in all manner of wickedness and crime. No
more devout believers can be found in all Christendom than those of
an unfortunate race in America who are proverbial alike for their
devoted piety and for their propensity to steal on their way home from
prayer-meeting; unless we except the bandits of Italy, who are as noted
for their strict observance of the forms of the Church as they are for
the fact that they live by the perpetration of murder and robbery.
Unfortunately, our illustrations cannot be drawn exclusively from any
one race or nation. In every Christian society there are all too many
devout believers who live in constant violation of every law, human and
Divine. It is an insult to the intelligence of Christ and of humanity
to hold the monstrous doctrine that the belief of these men can shield
them from the punishment due to infamy, or that they can be adequately
punished, "according to their deeds," by annihilation.

On the other hand, it is impossible to believe that Christ summarized
all the virtues, human and Divine, in the one word _belief_, or that by
the employment of that word he simply meant that all who live pure and
virtuous lives before God and man will be entitled to the rewards of
heaven. If this was all that he meant, he taught nothing new, either to
the Jewish nation or to any other civilized nation then in existence;
for the Hebrews had been taught the doctrine of future rewards and
punishments, of heaven and of hell, long before the appearance of
the Messiah. It is true that Moses did not teach the Israelites any
doctrine of the future world, and very vague mention is made of it
in the later books of the Old Testament. It is a historical fact,
nevertheless, that before the advent of Jesus the Jews had become
imbued with the Greek doctrine of Hades, which was an intermediate
waiting station between this life and the judgment. In this were
situated both Paradise and Gehenna, the one on the right and the other
on the left, and into these two compartments the spirits of the dead
were separated, according to their deserts. Jesus found this doctrine
already in existence, and in enforcing his moral precepts and in his
parables he employed the symbols which the people understood, neither
denying nor affirming their literal verity. I remark, therefore, that
in simply teaching the doctrine of future rewards and punishments he
taught nothing new; and, in that sense, he is no more entitled to be
considered the Saviour of mankind than would be any other successful
teacher of the same doctrine.

We are, therefore, forced back to a literal interpretation of the
statements under consideration. In this sense they can have but one
meaning, and that is, that _in the absence of belief in immortality,
the soul cannot have a conscious existence_. Reasoning from known
facts, there is no other rational conclusion. In explanation of
the meaning of "conscious existence" in the sense in which I have
employed that phrase, it is only necessary to direct the attention
of the intelligent reader to the accepted definition and doctrine
of consciousness. "In taking a comprehensive survey of the mental
phenomena," says Sir William Hamilton, "these all seem to comprise
one essential element, or to be possible only under one necessary
condition. This element or condition is consciousness, or the knowledge
that I--that the ego exists, in some determinate state."[56] Again, he
compares consciousness to "an internal light, by means of which, and
which alone, what passes in the mind is rendered visible."[57]

The existence of a man without the knowledge of sensations or of mental
operations would be one without consciousness, and would constitute a
purely vegetative existence as long as it continued. One can readily
understand this condition in the objective mind from the observation
of physical phenomena. It is equally comprehensible how the subjective
mind, or soul, may be deprived of a conscious existence when we
remember the fundamental law of its being, the law of suggestion. We
have already seen how the law of suggestion operates upon the soul
in cases of cataleptic trance, where the suggestion is made that the
patient is dead. In that case the suggestion was believed implicitly,
and the preparations for the funeral did not disturb the equanimity
of the patient in the least. Nor did the incongruity of the situation
suggest itself to the patient; namely, the idea of being dead and of
thinking of being dead at the same time.

The suggestion to the patient's subjective mind that he was dead,
rendered that mind unconscious of its own mental operations, and he
was, to all intents and purposes, dead.

This is, obviously, but a feeble illustration of the principle
involved. It is, however, sufficient to show how the soul may be
deprived of a conscious existence. A lifelong scepticism regarding
the existence of the soul, and a consequent disbelief in immortality,
constitute a suggestion that must operate to deprive the soul of a
conscious existence, if the law of suggestion is universal in its
operations.

The phenomena of experimental hypnotism also demonstrate the truth of
the proposition. Every hypnotist knows that a suggestion to a deeply
hypnotized subject that he is dead will produce a condition of such
profound lethargy or catalepsy as closely to simulate death, and were
the impression not removed, it would doubtless end in death. When
the subject remembers what has passed, he testifies that he believed
himself dead, and saw no incongruity in the situation. A settled belief
that the death of the body ends all, and the absence of any belief or
knowledge of the subject, must each operate to the same end.

It is this principle which constitutes the difference between men and
animals, and which gives the one the power and potency of immortality,
and leaves the other to perish. Animals, in common with men, are
possessed of a duality of mind; the subjective in the former being
proportionately stronger than in the latter, as is shown in their
stronger instincts. Objective reason being weak, and the power of
speech being absent, there is no possibility of the idea or suggestion
of immortality being imparted to the animal. Hence its soul can have no
conscious existence after the death of the body. It has the instinct of
self-preservation in common with man, but it is the preservation of the
life of the body. If the animal has any definite idea regarding life
and death, it all pertains to the body. An animal certainly can have no
idea of the possession of a soul, much less of its immortality.

When, therefore, Jesus proclaimed the law that belief was a condition
precedent to immortal life, he formulated a scientific proposition then
new to the world, and at the same time proclaimed himself master of the
science of the soul. He had declared the law of faith as it applied
to the power of the soul to heal the sick, and he knew that the same
law governed the soul in its relations to eternal life. He did not
formulate his propositions in the terms demanded by the science of the
nineteenth century, nor did he give such reasons for his conclusions
as inductive processes require. The time for that had not yet come.
Reasons would not have been appreciated in his day and generation. Nor
was it necessary for the accomplishment of his mission--which was to
proclaim the law of immortality--to show that the man whose soul has
not been aroused to consciousness dies as the brute dieth. This was
his mission; and in so far as he has accomplished that mission is he
entitled to be called the Saviour of the souls of mankind. He preached
no new doctrine other than this. His code of ethics was sublime and
god-like in its purity and simplicity, but it was not new. He taught
the doctrine of future rewards and punishments; but the symbols which
he employed to describe the condition of the soul after death--the
rewards bestowed and the punishments inflicted--were those which were
current among the people with whom his earthly lot was cast; nor does
this fact argue for or against his omniscience. It would, obviously,
have been impossible for him to convey to the world any adequate idea
of the modes of spiritual existence in terms which could be understood.
He used the current coin of expression to convey to mankind the broad
idea that the soul that is "saved" to immortal life through "belief"
will then be punished or rewarded according to the deeds done in the
body. It would, obviously, have been useless and confusing to his
hearers had he attempted to employ any new symbols, or any language to
which they were not accustomed, to convey that idea.

His mission, therefore, as the Saviour of the souls of men was
accomplished when he revealed to the world the essential condition
of immortal life. His mission as a moral teacher was secondary in
importance. The one doctrine was new, the other old. The one was a
scientific fact, the other a code of ethics. The one was essential to
the attainment of man's ultimate destiny as an immortal entity, the
other a standard of right and justice in this world, and a condition of
felicity in the world to come.

It is said that when Hillel, who flourished in the century preceding
Christ, was asked whether he could give the whole Jewish law in one
sentence, he answered: "Yes, perfectly well. What you do not want
anybody to do to you, do not you to them. That is the whole law;
everything else is only commentary."

The same may be truly said of the New Testament doctrines and the law
of faith. The only thing wholly new was the doctrine of faith. That is
the whole law; everything else is commentary.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 53: John iii. 14-16.]

[Footnote 54: John v. 24.]

[Footnote 55: John xi. 25, 26.]

[Footnote 56: Metaphysics, p. 126.]

[Footnote 57: Ibid.]




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE MISSION OF CHRIST; FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.

    The Success of Christ's Mission.--Chaotic State of Spiritual
    Philosophy in His Time.--The Various Doctrines in Vogue.--Jesus
    the first to simplify the Doctrine of Immortality.--He gave it a
    Definite Status in Philosophy.--The Doctrine of Future Rewards
    and Punishments.--God will "render to every Man according to
    His Deeds."--Spiritual Penalties for Violations of Spiritual
    Law.--The Sin against the Holy Ghost.--The Sin of Unbelief.--The
    Status of a Lost Soul.--Possible Reincarnation.--The Means of
    Punishment for Sin.--Affections.--Conscience.--Memory.--General
    Conclusions.--Scientific Basis of Christianity.


It is often charged by the sceptical world that the mission of Jesus
has thus far proved a failure, for that only about one third of the
inhabitants of the earth have ever heard the name of Christ; that of
Christian nations but a limited proportion of the inhabitants belong to
the Christian Church; and that of the church membership there is but a
limited number who so live as to entitle them to the rewards of heaven.
Measured by the common idea of what constitutes salvation, there may be
good ground for that criticism. But measured by the number of those who
believe in the immortality of the soul; by the number who have a hope
of a life beyond the grave; by the number who have a consciousness of
the existence within them of the transcendental ego; or by the number
of those who have risen, directly or indirectly, through the teachings
of Christ so far above the level of the brute creation as to have a
consciousness of the possibility of immortal life, and a consequent
hope and subjective belief in immortality,--his mission has proved the
grandest success recorded in the history of missionary effort.

It must be remembered that when he came into the world the doctrine of
immortal life held a very vague and uncertain place in the philosophy
of civilized mankind. I do not say that the doctrine of immortal
life was unknown, but it was undefined, and so tinctured with finite
conceptions, and limited by the uncertain boundaries of a hundred
different systems of fantastic philosophy, that it did not, and could
not, form a basis of rational hope or intelligent promise.

Thus, among the Chinese of that day (1), the doctrines of Confucius
held the most prominent place. His was a system which might be called a
parent-worship, in which virtue was rewarded and vice punished in the
individuals, or in their posterity, on earth, no promise of immortality
being held out. (2) The sect of Rationalists, founded by Lautsz in the
sixth century before Christ, taught the emanation of all good beings
from the Bosom of Reason, and their absorption thither for an eternal
existence, while the bad were doomed to successive births and many
sorrows. (3) Another sect held that the principle of all things is but
a vacuum,--nothing,--from which all things have sprung, and to which
all must return.

The Hindoo doctrine was substantially the same as it is now; and it is
so well known as not to require a particular statement, further than to
say that its disciples believe in successive incarnations of the soul,
and its final absorption into the incorporeal nature of Brahm.

The Persians believed in the doctrine of hell for the wicked, and of
paradise for the good; but held that all the wicked would eventually
be purified by fire. It was thought that the fires were hot enough to
purify the most abominable soul in about three days.

Herodotus tells us that the Egyptians were the first to defend the
doctrine of the immortality of the soul, and he says that they believed
in its transmigration through various animal bodies for a period of
three thousand years before its return to a human body.

Of the Grecian schools, the Pythagoreans held that the soul is
eternal,--that is, uncreated and indestructible; that no real entity
is either made or destroyed. The Eleatics held practically the same
doctrine. The Ionics taught that the soul was reabsorbed into the
Divine reason. The Stoics believed in the periodical destruction of all
things by fire, when the good will be absorbed and the wicked perish.
The Epicurean faith was well described by Paul in the phrase, "Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." The Pyrrhonists were the sceptics
of the age, and doubted everything. Socrates taught the doctrine of
immortality for the good, the virtuous, and the wise. The incurably
bad are "hurled into Tartarus, whence they never come forth;" whilst
those who can be cured are subjected to needful punishments before
being admitted into the mansions of the blest. Plato was a Pythagorean,
with certain bizarre notions of his own, such as the migration of souls
through various brute and human forms; and he believed that even the
duration of divine work is limited.

It will thus be seen that when Jesus appeared on earth he found the
philosophy of the soul in a very chaotic state. It was his mission
to bring order out of chaos, and to proclaim the true philosophy; to
declare the conditions of immortality, and point the way to eternal
happiness. That he simplified the doctrine of immortality into a system
so plain that "the wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein,"
no one will deny. Its grand simplicity, when placed in contrast with
the complicated doctrines of all other systems of religious philosophy,
ancient or modern, places upon it the stamp of inherent probability;
for scientific truth is always simple and free from complication. It
was Jesus who gave the doctrine of immortality a distinct and definite
form and a permanent place in the philosophy of the civilized world. It
was he who first proclaimed the fundamental law underlying the science
of the soul. It was from his words, spoken to a few humble followers
in an obscure corner of the earth, that the doctrine has spread
throughout all the civilized world. From the centres of civilization
the Church has sent its missionaries, its representatives of the
Master, among all peoples, civilized and savage, preaching the gospel
of immortality to all mankind. Its influence is not confined to those
who believe in the tenets of the Christian Church, nor even to those
who have heard the name of Christ. It has spread, through some subtle,
unseen power and potency, until it permeates every fibre of human
society, and constitutes the promise of every religion, the hope of all
humanity.

I have, in other chapters, pointed out some of the proofs which science
affords of the doctrine of immortality, and of the verity of the
history of Jesus of Nazareth. I have shown that every known fact which
bears upon the subject points to the continued life of the soul after
the death of the body. I have shown that the discoveries of modern
science demonstrate the fact that Jesus was in possession of a complete
knowledge of the science of the soul in its relations to its physical
environment. I have shown that all known facts bearing upon the subject
go to prove that he also had a knowledge of its laws in its relations
to a purely spiritual existence.

We have then, _first_, an array of demonstrable facts which
irresistibly lead to the conclusion that the soul survives the body;
_secondly_, another array of facts which prove that it was possible
for an exceptionally endowed person to perceive the laws of the
soul; _thirdly_, an array of facts which demonstrate that Jesus did
understand those laws as far as they pertain to the soul's relations
to the physical man; _fourthly_, we have facts which show that he
understood the laws of the soul in its relations to the spiritual
world, and the essential conditions of its conscious existence after
the death of the body; and _fifthly_, we have in the New Testament a
record of the acts which demonstrated his knowledge of the subject,
as well as of his solemn and repeated declarations of the laws which
pertain to that subject.

When we consider together all these cumulative proofs, it may safely
be said that there are few principles of nature that are more clearly
established by inductive processes of reasoning than is the principle
of immortality.

Having established this proposition, it remains only to consider
Christ's doctrine of future rewards and punishments. Obviously, this
is a more difficult question to handle, for the reason that there
are necessarily few facts known to mankind which can be considered
scientifically demonstrative of any proposition which has been made
by any one on that subject. Nevertheless, if there is one known fact
which confirms his declarations on that question, and at the same time
satisfies the demands of human reason and the common sense of Divine
Justice, we may safely conclude that the Christian religion rests upon
a purely scientific basis.

The first important fact which confronts us in considering this branch
of the subject is, that Jesus said very little on the subject. It was
obviously impossible for him to convey to the human mind any adequate
knowledge or idea of the actual conditions of a spiritual existence.
He was hedged about by the limitations of human speech and the finite
understanding of his followers. His descriptions, therefore, of the
places of future rewards and punishments were necessarily limited to
material conceptions. He could effectively employ no other symbolism
than that with which his hearers were familiar and which they could
appreciate. He had taught them in plain and unmistakable terms the
conditions upon which the soul could attain a conscious existence;
and having done that, his mission was thenceforth a moral one. Having
taught them how to attain eternal life, he taught them so to conduct
their lives in this world as to entitle them to the joys of that life.
It was no part of his mission to reconstruct the accepted geography of
the world of spirits, for it could only add confusion to their crude
conceptions. His parables were drawn from the objects and incidents of
their every-day life, and were necessarily limited in their application
to a spiritual existence. His only object was to enforce a code of
morals founded upon the eternal principles of right and justice,
simple in terms, and adapted to their comprehension, but grand in its
simplicity, and adapted to the varying conditions of human society for
all time.

The question now is, What is to be considered the doctrine of future
rewards and punishments to be gathered from the New Testament? It is
clear that we must reject all material conceptions of both heaven and
hell. It follows that the punishment must be a moral one, since there
is no material entity to be dealt with. The sense of justice inherent
in all mankind would seem to indicate that the punishment shall be
commensurate with the offence. It must be assumed, therefore, that the
true doctrine is expressed in Romans ii. 6, where it is said that God
will "_render to every man according to his deeds_."

This satisfies the finite sense of justice, and perfectly accords
with the highest human conceptions of the character of a God of love,
mercy, and justice. The good man would ask nothing more, the bad could
expect nothing less. Reasoning from analogy would lead to the same
conclusion. We know from daily experience that every violation of the
laws of our physical nature is followed inevitably by its adequate
punishment. We have a right to suppose, therefore, that every violation
of moral and spiritual law will be followed by its appropriate penalty.
We know, indeed, from what we have seen of the teachings of Christ,
that spiritual penalties follow a violation of spiritual law. In other
words, the law of suggestion follows the soul across the boundaries
of eternity. Spiritual death is the inevitable result of spiritual
unbelief. It is not a vindictive punishment, it is the fundamental law
of spiritual life. Just as the spirit quickens the flesh, so does faith
quicken the spirit.

Again, we find a spiritual penalty following a violation of spiritual
law in what Christ taught regarding the sin against the Holy Ghost.
Just what that sin consists of, never has been satisfactorily defined.
We are told that it is a sin which cannot be forgiven. It must,
therefore, consist of a violation of some fundamental law of the
soul's existence, the penalty for which is inevitable according to the
fixed laws of God. It cannot be a moral offence, consisting simply
in wrong-doing, for such sins can be atoned for. A moral offence so
gross that a God of infinite mercy and love cannot forgive it, and, if
the Scriptures are to be believed, does not stand ready to forgive it
when proper atonement is made, cannot be conceived. Nor has it been
mentioned in Holy Writ. We are therefore forced to the conclusion that,
as before remarked, the sin against the Holy Ghost must consist of a
violation of the fundamental law of the soul's existence. It must,
therefore, be the sin of unbelief, and consist of a blasphemous denial
of the existence of the soul and its Father, God. This would be in
strict accordance with the fundamental law of suggestion, as it has
been scientifically demonstrated to exist. The emphatic and persistent
denial of the soul's existence must eventually prove to be a suggestion
so strong as to overcome its instinctive belief in its own existence,
and thus neutralize its instinctive desire for immortal life. It would,
therefore, have the same effect as unbelief arising from a want of
knowledge, or a lack of the intellectual power to conceive the idea of
immortality. The soul, in either case, could not have a consciousness
of its own existence or individuality.

It may be asked, What becomes of the soul when deprived of a conscious
existence? Does it actually die, disintegrate, and return to its
original elements? Is it possible that a human soul, created by God
and endowed with the power and potency of immortal life, can fail of
accomplishing its mission, and become extinct? Can a segregated portion
of the Divine essence, once individualized, ever perish or lose its
identity? All these questions, and more, will be asked. I do not know.
Perhaps it is reincarnated. I do not know anything about reincarnation.
I know as much about it, however, as any one else knows. I mean by
this that no one can be said to know anything about the truth of any
proposition that has not underlying it a substratum of demonstrable
fact. The theory of reincarnation has no such basis; and I shall not,
therefore, indulge in speculation on the subject further than to say
that it is possibly true that reincarnation is the process of the
soul's evolution. If so, reasoning from analogy, I should say that
the process ceases when the soul reaches the status of a conscious
existence. In the physical world we see that the process of evolution
has gone forward progressively from the lowest form of animal life up
to man. There the process ceases. All further progress is in the line
of improvement in the human race. No higher type of animal life is
developed, and in our pride of manhood we believe that there never can
be any higher animal existence. It may, therefore, be true that the
progress of a soul is through reincarnation from the lower animal life
to the higher, until it reaches the human; and that it may still go on
in the lower grades of human organisms until it reaches the dignity of
a conscious human soul. Having reached that point, the law of progress
will expend its force in carrying it forward to its ultimate destiny.
Considered as the process of the soul's evolution, the necessity for
further reincarnation apparently no longer exists after the soul has
attained the power and potency of a conscious, self-existent entity.

I throw out this suggestion for the benefit of those spiritistic
mediums and other trance-seers who have found out so much more than
Jesus knew about the internal economy of the spiritual world and the
laws which pertain to spiritual existence. But this is a digression
into the forbidden field of speculation without facts.

The common experience of mankind demonstrates the proposition that
appropriate physical penalties are the necessary result of a violation
of physical laws; and it has been shown from the teachings of Jesus,
confirmed by the inductions of science, that the violation of the
laws of spiritual existence is followed by inevitable spiritual
penalties. It now remains to be considered what facts are known to
science which will confirm the doctrine that moral punishment will
follow the infraction of moral laws, in exact accordance "with the
deeds done in the body." In order to do so intelligently, we must
first briefly consider the question as to what the nature of the
punishments and rewards must be. It being manifestly impossible for us
to know, affirmatively, the particular modes of spiritual existence,
we can arrive at a conclusion only by the method of exclusion. We
must, therefore, begin by excluding all idea of material penalties or
rewards. All such conceptions of spiritual life must be relegated to
the dark ages of human intelligence, when man was able to conceive
of no joy apart from physical pleasure, and no punishment other than
physical suffering. Our conceptions must, therefore, be limited by
what we know of the nature and attributes of the soul, as exhibited
through phenomena. The first question, then, is, What do we know of the
attributes of the soul?

We know, first, that it is the seat of the emotions. It is therefore
capable of being rewarded or punished through the natural affections.

Secondly, we know that it possesses the inherent power of perception
of the laws of nature and of God, including the eternal, God-ordained
principles of right and wrong. It will, therefore, after its release
from the body, be able to estimate the value of every good deed, and
realize the inherent infamy of every wrong one, as weighed in the
scales of Eternal Justice.

Thirdly and lastly, we know of one attribute and power of the human
soul more pregnant with weal or woe, with joy or sorrow, than all the
others combined; and that is its perfect memory.

These are the essential things that we know of the soul from the
observation of phenomena. Our conceptions of it, therefore, are limited
to its intellectual, moral, and emotional attributes. We know it only
as an intellectual entity, and our conceptions of the rewards and
punishments adequate to the ends of Divine Justice must be limited
accordingly.

Little need be said in explanation of the trend of this brief summary.
The conclusions are obvious. We have before us an intellectual entity
capable of experiencing all the natural emotions of humanity, of joy
and sorrow, of love and friendship; endowed with a perfect perception
of the principles of right and wrong, and consequently in possession of
an awakened conscience more keenly alive and active than the objective
mind can conceive, and possessing a memory so perfect that every good
and every bad deed of its whole earthly existence is constantly before
it like a vast panorama. What greater reward could such a being ask or
experience than would be found in the contemplation of a well-spent
life? What greater punishment than the remorse of conscience arising
from the ever-persistent memory of a life of wickedness and crime?

It is obvious that both rewards and punishments are adequate and exact,
and that God will "render to every man according to his deeds," by and
through the operation of his immutable, unchanging laws.

I have now summarized enough of the leading points in the history of
Jesus of Nazareth and of his doctrines, and compared them with known
phenomena with sufficient particularity to show that the inductions of
modern science demonstrate the essential truth of the history of his
physical manifestations, and to prove, as far as inductive reasoning
from known phenomena can prove anything not physically demonstrable,
the truth of every essential doctrine of his spiritual philosophy.
I have by no means exhausted the subject, for the New Testament is
full of passages confirmatory of the view I have taken. It is true
that I have interpreted the passages relating to the conditions
precedent to the attainment of immortal life in a way in which they
have never before been interpreted; but in doing so I have harmonized
that which has heretofore seemed incongruous, and have thus removed a
stumbling-block from the pathway of scepticism. I have no fear that
even prejudice will find fault with my interpretation; for it not only
leaves the essential doctrines relating to rewards and punishments
uncontradicted, but it affords strong confirmation of their essential
truth. Moreover, my interpretation is confirmed by the facts of modern
science, and must, therefore, shed a new lustre upon the name and
attributes of Jesus, demonstrating, as it does, the accuracy of his
knowledge of the laws of the soul.

It has been but a few years since the researches of science began to
furnish facts confirmatory of the history and doctrines of Christ;
but it has come to pass that every new fact discovered, and every new
principle evolved, weakens the foundation of every other religious
superstructure, and adds strength and harmony of proportions to that
erected by the man of Nazareth.

It may, therefore, be now confidently asserted that Christianity
possesses that to which no other system of religion can lay a valid
claim; namely, a sound scientific basis.




[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXVII.

DEDUCTIONS FROM VARIOUS ATTRIBUTES OF THE SOUL.

    The Question of Identity.--Consciousness and
    Memory.--Identity considered in Reference to Rewards
    and Punishments.--Conscience.--Conflicting Theories of
    Psychologists.--Education and Intuition.--Different Standards
    of Morality.--The Soul's Perception of the Eternal Principles
    of Right and Wrong.--The Instinct of Worship.--Its Abnormal
    Manifestations.--The Law of Suggestion.--Universality of the
    Sentiment of Worship.--Its Normal Manifestations.--Demonstrative of
    the Existence of a God of Love.--Old Arguments invalid.--Socrates
    and Paley.--Argument predicated on the Affectional
    Emotions.--Syllogistic Deductions.--The Divine Pedigree of Man.


It has often been said that no proposition is worthy of belief that
is not verified by phenomena. Whilst I do not commit myself to a
maxim so broad in its terms, I have thus far religiously refrained
from advancing an idea that is not so verified. In other words, the
primary object of this book is to interpret phenomena, and not to
advance new ideas, except those which are thrust upon me as necessary
deductions from the terms of my hypothesis. Sincerely believing that
the fundamental propositions of that hypothesis are true, I have not
hesitated to follow them into whatever field they might lead, and to
accept every legitimate conclusion. In pursuance of such deductions I
have been led reluctantly to the conclusion that none of the phenomena
commonly attributed to supermundane agencies afford tangible evidence
of the continued existence of the soul after the death of the body.
I have, however, been more than compensated by the discovery, in
pursuance of the same hypothesis, that in the inherent powers and
attributes of the soul is to be found indubitable evidence of its
immortality. This evidence is based on phenomena which have been, and
may be, produced by experiment. Many of these phenomena have been
already pointed out, but others remain to be considered which have an
important bearing upon the question under immediate consideration;
namely, the immortality of the soul, and its relations to the Supreme
Being.

There are still other attributes and powers of the soul which have
been considered, from which further conclusions may be drawn which may
assist us in forming correct conclusions regarding its status in a
future life. The first of these attributes which I purpose briefly to
discuss is that of memory, and its relations to the question of spirit
identity.

The question as to whether the soul of man retains its identity after
the death of the body, is second only in interest and importance to
the question of immortality. There are many who hold that the soul
is necessarily reabsorbed into the Divine essence, and finds its
compensation for the ills of earthly life in becoming an integral part
of God, and, as such, a participator in his power and glory. This
presupposes a loss of identity, and to most minds would be considered
equivalent to annihilation; by others it is regarded as the highest
conception of eternal felicity. Thus far no one, as far as I am
aware, has attempted to offer any scientific reasons for believing
one way or the other. It seems to me that there is abundant evidence
in phenomena observable in this life to demonstrate, as far as such a
proposition is demonstrable, that the soul does retain its identity in
a more pronounced degree, if possible, than we can retain it in this
objective existence. In what does identity consist, or, more properly
speaking, how is it retained? The answer is, through our consciousness
and memory. It is obvious that if either is lost, identity is lost. It
is equally obvious that if both are retained, identity is retained.
Now, the phenomena alluded to which bear upon the question relate to
the perfect memory of the subjective mind, or soul. This faculty of
subjective memory is implanted in the human soul for some purpose.
It certainly does not pertain to this life, for, as we have seen, it
is only under abnormal conditions that the phenomenon is observable.
It must, therefore, be a part of the Divine economy pertaining to
the future existence of the soul. It has no use here, for objective
recollection is all-sufficient for objective existence and purposes.
The conclusion is irresistible that it is for the purpose, amongst
other things, of enabling the soul to retain its identity. Its bearing
upon the question of future rewards and punishments has already been
commented upon; nevertheless, at the risk of repetition, a further
remark will be ventured. It is obvious that if the soul did not retain
a conscious memory of its earthly life, no adequate or just reward or
punishment could be meted out to it. Even human justice would revolt
against, and human laws would prevent, the infliction of the penalty
for a capital crime, if it were clearly proved that the criminal had so
far lost his mind as to have no recollection of the events of his past
life, or, in other words, had lost conscious identity. Besides, it must
not be forgotten that the soul is the seat of the emotions, as well as
the storehouse of memory. It is obvious that it is only through the
emotions and the memory that rewards can be conferred, or punishments
inflicted, upon the immaterial soul.

Another question which has been incidentally alluded to deserves a
more extended notice, for the reason that it bears directly upon the
question of future rewards and punishments, and is also illustrative
of the general hypothesis under consideration; it is the question of
conscience. Metaphysicians are divided in opinion on this question,
one school holding that conscience is innate and instinctive, and the
other that it is the result of experience and education. My hypothesis
leads to the conclusion that each school is partly right and partly
wrong. Granted that the eternal principles of right and wrong are a
part of the fixed and immutable laws of God, it follows that the soul
of man will, under favorable conditions, have a clear perception of
those laws. Those conditions may or may not be present during the life
of the body. They certainly will be present when the soul is freed
from the clogs of the flesh, and is able to perceive all the fixed
laws of nature. In the mean time, while it is an inhabitant of the
body it is amenable to control by the power of objective suggestion,
and hence is dependent upon the objective education of the individual
for its standard of right and wrong. This standard may be high or low
in any individual case. There will be one standard in one community,
and another in another, all depending upon education and social
environment; but in each case the subjective mind will follow the
suggestions imparted to it by objective education. If the standard
is high in any individual case, the sentiment will gradually become
instinctive, so that the subjective impulses and emotions will play an
important part. If the standard is low, the instinctive emotions will
only be conspicuous for their absence.

Man stands in his relation to the principles of right and wrong in
just the same position that he occupies in his relation to the laws of
electricity or any other natural law. He is struggling to ascertain
the laws in each case for the purpose of placing himself in harmony
with them. His knowledge is of slow growth, but each century finds the
general standard of right and wrong higher than it was the century
before. If the soul possessed, in the normal condition of man, an
instinctive knowledge of those laws, he would not have to await the
slow process of evolution to develop them.

History records the name of but one man in whom the eternal principles
of right and wrong were instinctive. That man was Jesus Christ. He
perceived those laws, as he perceived all spiritual laws, while yet
in the flesh. We may profit by his example and his precepts, but
otherwise we must work out our own salvation, knowing that, when the
soul reaches its final home, it will be in possession of the eternal
standard by which to measure the guilt or innocence of every deed done
in the body.

The only remaining psychic phenomena which I propose to discuss are
those connected with that emotion of the human soul which finds its
expression in the worship of the Supreme Being. This feeling is so
widespread that no system of philosophy is complete that does not take
it into account. Like every other emotion, it has its normal mode of
expression, and its abnormal manifestations. The difference between the
two modes of expression is so great that their identity of origin has
been, to a great extent, lost sight of.

The abnormal manifestation of this emotion now occurs principally among
the uncultivated classes of religious worshippers, and the feeling
has been somewhat contemptuously designated as "emotional religion."
It is conspicuous in the revival meetings of certain religious sects,
where in former years its manifestations were so violent and unseemly
that it was looked upon as reprehensible; but these exhibitions have
been, of late years, generally repressed, except among the lower orders
of the people. Scientists have tried to account for it on the ground
that it is the result of mesmeric power consciously or unconsciously
exerted by the preachers over their congregations, resulting in an
ecstatic emotion wholly abnormal and entirely unconnected with true
religion. The fact that it sometimes results in a cataleptic condition,
and sometimes in a trance undistinguishable from that produced by
hypnotic processes, lent color to the theory, and has gradually brought
the educated classes to regard the feeling of religious emotion with
distrust. The result is that what used to be known as "vital religion"
is gradually becoming a thing of the past, and is giving place to a
cold, self-contained, unemotional sentiment, which is as unlike true
religious worship as the other, and as abnormal.

It is true that the abnormal manifestations of the emotion are governed
by the same laws, and are produced by the same causes, as other
subjective phenomena. Suggestion plays its part in these as in other
things pertaining to the attributes of the soul; and in these, as in
all others, a wrong, extravagant, or misdirected suggestion produces
abnormal results. But this does not argue that the emotion is abnormal.
There is no emotion of the human soul that has not its abnormal
manifestations when not directed and controlled by reason. The common
experience of every-day life demonstrates this proposition. One of the
most sacred and praiseworthy of all the human emotions is that of love
between the sexes. But the fact that our jails are filled with those
who have indulged in its abnormal manifestations does not argue that
the institution of marriage is abnormal.

The sentiment of worship is as widespread as the sentiment of love;
and that very fact shows that it must be taken into account in
the diagnosis of the human entity, if we would arrive at correct
conclusions. That this sentiment is universal, and is repressed only by
an effort of will, no one will deny. It is its abnormal manifestations
merely that are to be guarded against. Like every other emotion of
the soul, its normal indulgence is in the highest degree healthful
and exalting. The normal expression of the emotion of earthly love
brings us into harmonious relations with our fellow-beings. The normal
expression of the emotion of worship brings the soul into harmonious
relations with its Creator. Every form and act of worship is an
expression of this emotion. It is experienced by all races of the human
family, from the fetich worshipper to the Christian. Each stands in
awe and reverence before some superior power, external to himself, and
capable of controlling his destiny. In proportion to his intelligence
will his conceptions of that power be exalted; and in proportion to the
exaltation of his conceptions will be the intensity of his emotions of
awe, reverence, love, worship.

The conclusions which necessarily follow are of the most important
character. The first and most important--for it includes all the
rest--is that the fact of the existence of the emotion of worship is
demonstrative of the existence of a Supreme Being.

And right here I wish to make an important distinction. The
standard-theological argument in favor of the immortality of the soul
is based upon the following syllogism:

1. There is a universal desire for immortality.

2. The mind of man cannot conceive an object of desire the means for
the attainment of which are not somewhere in existence.

Conclusion: Man is necessarily immortal.

Now, if these premises were demonstrably correct, we might safely
rely upon the conclusion. But they are not correct. The first may be
assumed to be practically true, for the sake of the argument; but the
desire for continued life beyond the grave may be explained upon other
grounds, namely, upon the instinctive desire to prolong life. This
instinct is shared with man by all the animal creation, and pertains,
primarily, to the preservation of animal existence. Man soon learns
that continued animal existence is impossible. He sees that all must
die; but, as "hope springs eternal in the human breast," he conceives
the hope that he may, somehow, live after the death of the body. The
existence of the desire for immortality is, therefore, traceable
directly to the purely animal instinct of self-preservation.

The second premise is intrinsically absurd. It is obvious that
the brain of man may conceive of many objects of desire which are
manifestly impossible of realization, as well as non-existent. In
the Christian mythology of Milton the idea is developed of a rival
power--Satan--in heaven almost, but not quite, equal to God. In the
struggle which ensued from a rebellion of Satan he was cast out, and
set up a kingdom of his own on this earth. Now, a strictly orthodox
person might say that this was merely an allegorical representation of
an existent fact. But suppose the poet had gone a step further, and had
represented Satan as going outside the universe and setting up a rival
universe of his own. Would that conception have proved that an outside
universe is possible or existent?[58]

Again, the existence of a Supreme Being is thought to have been
demonstrated by the argument of Socrates wherein he confuted
Aristodemus the atheist, and used the statues of Polycletus and the
pictures of Zeuxis to illustrate the idea that, as the structure of
the universe shows evidence of design, therefore there must have been
a designer. Theology has never improved upon this argument, and Paley
makes the same use of the watch for an illustration as Socrates did
of the statues and pictures. It is a strong argument, but it does not
reach the point which the human heart desires to have demonstrated. Nor
does it add force to, but rather weakens, the argument which is found
by all reflecting minds in every tree, leaf, bud, or flower. It simply
proves the existence of a force, which all admit.

What the human heart desires, and what the human mind seeks, are proofs
of the existence of a God, not of mere intelligence and potentiality,
but such a God as Jesus characterized,--a God of love and benevolence,
a God who sustains the relation of Father to all humanity.

It seems to me that in seeking within the realm of human desire for an
argument in proof either of immortality or the existence of a Supreme
Being, theologians have failed to make a necessary distinction between
desires which may or may not be universal and inherent, and desires
which have their source in the affectional emotions. It is upon the
latter only that an argument can be logically predicated. And I may
go further, and say that an argument logically predicated upon the
affectional emotions, is demonstrative. It is true that some of the
emotions of the soul seem to pertain exclusively to this life; but not
all. The emotion of religious worship pertains solely to that invisible
power which we call God. Nevertheless, we may employ the others for
illustration. Let us see how this doctrine applies to the subject under
consideration. Putting it in syllogistic form, we have the following:--

1. The affectional emotions are universal attributes of every normally
developed human mind.

2. No affectional emotion can have an existence in the normally
developed human mind in the absence of an object of affection capable
of reciprocal feeling.

Therefore, when a normally developed human being experiences the
emotion of love or affection, there is necessarily existent an object
of love or affection normally capable of reciprocal emotion.

Thus, the emotion of friendship presupposes the friendly relation
existing between man and his fellow-man.

The emotion of sexual love presupposes the sexual relation and the
existence of persons of the opposite sex normally capable of reciprocal
emotion.

The emotion of parental love presupposes the relation of parent and
child, each normally capable of reciprocal attachment.

It follows that _the emotion of religious worship presupposes the
existence of an object of worship capable of reciprocal emotion_.

If this is not the correct interpretation of the universal sentiment of
worship which is inherent in the breast of every normal human being,
then there is an exception to the laws which govern every other human
emotion. As there are no exceptions in the operation of nature's laws,
the conclusion is inevitable, not only that the emotion of religious
worship is normal, but that it is the one phenomenal attribute of the
soul which gives to man indubitable evidence of his Divine origin, and
demonstrates the existence of a God of love. It is the connecting link
between man and his Creator. It is the instinctive manifestation of
filial affection which proclaims our Divine pedigree, and demonstrates
the universal brotherhood of man and the Fatherhood of God.

    "Thou hast made us for Thyself, and our hearts are restless till
    they rest in Thee."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 58: One of the most eminent and fair-minded theologians in
the United States, who has kindly read the manuscript of this work and
indulgently criticised its contents, suggests that I have not treated
the standard theological argument quite fairly, in that I should have
stated the second proposition less broadly: that the desire referred
to is _instinctive desire_, and should have been so limited. I freely
admit that as careful and candid a reasoner as he would naturally so
limit the statement of the proposition. But not all theologians are as
candid and logical. However, I provisionally accept his limitation, and
reply that the answer to the amended second proposition is embraced in
the answer to the first.]


THE END.




_THIRD EDITION_


THE DIVINE PEDIGREE OF MAN

_Or, The Testimony of Evolution and Psychology to the Fatherhood of God_


By THOMSON J. HUDSON, LL.D.


An original conception of evolution which is worked out with the
same avoidance of vague theory, and the same adherence to a basis of
well-authenticated facts and to cogent and logical reasoning, which
characterize Dr. Hudson's former works. It presents an original and
convincing interpretation of the facts which have been accumulated
by the labors of scientists such as H�ckel, Darwin, and Spencer; and
constitutes an attempt to establish thereby the belief in Christian
Theism. It shows that the god-like powers of man exist potentially in
the lowest forms of animal life known to us; and advances a powerfully
eloquent argument against the atheistic attitude which so many
evolutionists have assumed.

    The book reveals much study and research, and its optimism is sure
    to bring much cheer to those who can accept its theories.--_Chicago
    Tribune._

    An interesting and valuable contribution to the discussion of a
    great problem.--_The Sunday-School Times._

12mo. $1.50


A.C. McCLURG & COMPANY

PUBLISHERS � CHICAGO, ILLINOIS




_SEVENTH EDITION_


A SCIENTIFIC DEMONSTRATION _of the_ FUTURE LIFE

By THOMSON J. HUDSON, LL.D.


The success that "The Law of Psychic Phenomena" met with induced the
author to prepare and publish the present volume, for the purpose
of carrying to their legitimate conclusions some of the principles
laid down in his former one. Dr. Hudson, in pursuing his inquiry, has
endeavored to follow the strictest rules of scientific induction,
taking nothing for granted that is not axiomatic, and holding that
there is nothing worthy of belief that is not sustained by a solid
basis of well-authenticated facts.--_The New York Times._

12mo. $1.50


A.C. McCLURG & COMPANY

PUBLISHERS � CHICAGO, ILLINOIS




_DR. HUDSON'S LAST BOOK_


THE EVOLUTION OF THE SOUL AND OTHER ESSAYS


By THOMSON J. HUDSON, LL.D.


After the death of Dr. Hudson in 1903, enough material was found
among his papers for one more book from his bold and original pen. It
consists of a number of lectures delivered at various times, and all
dealing with the subject on which he is now an acknowledged authority.
This collection of scattered papers supplements most admirably his
previous books,--particularly "The Law of Mental Medicine" and "The
Law of Psychic Phenomena,"--and will, in a way, help to complete the
work most deplorably interrupted by his untimely death. To say that
these essays are in Dr. Hudson's characteristic and illuminating style
is all that is needed to convince his thousands of admirers that this
posthumous volume is one of the most absorbing interest. The addition
of the portrait and biographical sketch will also be much appreciated.

With portrait, $1.20 net


A.C. McCLURG & COMPANY

PUBLISHERS � CHICAGO, ILLINOIS




_THIRD EDITION_


THE LAW OF MENTAL MEDICINE

_The Correlation of the Facts of Psychology and Histology in their
Relation to Mental Therapeutics_

By THOMSON J. HUDSON, LL.D.


The book is one to read studiously, and will appeal to a large class of
modern thinkers who have caught a theoretical glimpse of an existence
free from the misery of disease. Dr. Hudson's celebrated work, "The Law
of Psychic Phenomena," has paved the way for the student of psychic
lore to receive and digest his later works.--_New York Tribune._

His theories are scientific in method, and soundly based, as well
as sufficiently untechnical for the general reader.--_San Francisco
Argonaut._

There is no denying the interest the book holds for the thinking,
earnest student of mental phenomena, and even those who scoff and sneer
at "faith cure" in its various branches will find much in this volume
that will start a serious train of thought.--_Nashville American._

There is nothing of the quack about Dr. Hudson. His book is eminently
practical, and is quite free from "the falsehood of extremes." Nobody
can be hurt by reading it, and it will help many to correct erroneous
prepossessions and misunderstandings.--_Charleston News and Courier._

"The Law of Mental Medicine" is the title of an interesting book from
the pen of Thomson Jay Hudson, in which he points out a simple system
of practice depending for its efficacy on natural laws.--_Detroit Free
Press._

12mo. $1.20 net

A.C. McCLURG & COMPANY

PUBLISHERS � CHICAGO, ILLINOIS






End of Project Gutenberg's The Law of Psychic Phenomena, by Thomson Jay Hudson

##############################################################################
## POWER THROUGH REPOSE — Annie Payson Call (1891) — progressive relaxation before Jacobson: body-part release sequences, rest training
##############################################################################

Produced by Steve Solomon








POWER THROUGH REPOSE

BY

ANNIE PAYSON CALL

New Edition with Additions



_Personality binds--universality expands._

FRANCOISE DELSARTE.


When the body is perfectly adjusted, perfectly supplied with force,
perfectly free and works with the greatest economy of expenditure,
it is fitted to be a perfect instrument alike of impression,
experience, and expression.

W. R. ALGER.






I.

THE GUIDANCE OF THE BODY





THE literature relating to the care of the human body is already
very extensive. Much has been written about the body's proper food,
the air it should breathe, the clothing by which it should be
protected, the best methods of its development. That literature
needs but little added to it, until we, as rational beings, come
nearer to obeying the laws which it discloses, and to feeling daily
the help which comes from that obedience.

It is of the better use, the truer guidance of this machine, that I
wish especially to write. Although attention is constantly called to
the fact of its misuse,--as in neglected rest and in
over-strain,--in all the unlimited variety which the perverted
ingenuity of a clever people has devised, it seems never to have
come to any one's mind that this strain in all things, small and
great, is something that can be and should be studiously abandoned,
with as regular a process of training, from the first simple steps
to those more complex, as is required in the work for the
development of muscular strength. When a perversion of Nature's laws
has continued from generation to generation, we, of the ninth or
tenth generation, can by no possibility jump back into the place
where the laws can work normally through us, even though our eyes
have been opened to a full recognition of such perversion. We must
climb back to an orderly life, step by step, and the compensation is
large in the constantly growing realization of the greatness of the
laws we have been disobeying. The appreciation of the power of a
natural law, as it works through us, is one of the keenest pleasures
that can come to man in this life.

The general impression seems to be that common-sense should lead us
to a better use of our machines at once. Whereas, common-sense will
not bring a true power of guiding the muscles, any more than it will
cause the muscles' development, unless having the common-sense to
see the need, we realize with it the necessity for cutting a path
and walking in it. For the muscles' development, several paths have
been cut, and many who are in need are walking in them, but, to the
average man, the road to the best kind of muscular development still
remains closed. The only training now in use is followed by
sleight-of-hand performers, acrobats, or other jugglers, and that is
limited to the professional needs of its followers.

Again, as the muscles are guided by means of the nerves, a training
for the guidance of the muscles means, so far as the physique is
concerned, first, a training for the better use of the nervous
force. The nervous system is so wonderful in its present power for
good or ill, so wonderful in its possible power either way, and so
much more wonderful as we realize what we do not know about it, that
it is not surprising that it is looked upon with awe. Neither is it
strange that it seems to many, especially the ignorant, a subject to
be shunned. It is not uncommon for a mother, whose daughter is
suffering, and may be on the verge of nervous prostration because of
her misused nerves, to say, "I do not want my daughter to know that
she has nerves." The poor child knows it already in the wrong way.
It is certainly better that she should know her nerves by learning a
wholesome, natural use of them. The mother's remark is common with
many men and women when speaking of themselves,--common with
teachers when talking to or of their pupils. It is of course quite
natural that it should be a prevailing idea, because hitherto the
mention of nerves by man or woman has generally meant perverted
nerves, and to dwell on our perversions, except long enough to shun
them, is certainly unwholesome in the extreme.






II.

PERVERSIONS IN THE GUIDANCE OF THE BODY





SO evident are the various, the numberless perversions of our powers
in the misuse of the machine, that it seems almost unnecessary to
write of them. And yet, from another point of view, it is very
necessary; for superabundant as they are, thrusting their evil
results upon us every day in painful ways, still we have eyes and
see not, ears and hear not, and for want of a fuller realization of
these most grievous mistakes, we are in danger of plunging more and
more deeply into the snarls to which they bring us. From nervous
prostration to melancholia, or other forms of insanity, is not so
long a step.

It is of course a natural sequence that the decadence of an entire
country must follow the waning powers of the individual citizens.
Although that seems very much to hint, it cannot be too much when we
consider even briefly the results that have already come to us
through this very misuse of our own voluntary powers. The
advertisements of nerve medicines alone speak loudly to one who
studies in the least degree the physical tendencies of the nation.
Nothing proves better the artificial state of man, than the
artificial means he uses to try to adjust himself to Nature's
laws,--means which, in most cases, serve to assist him to keep up a
little longer the appearance of natural life. For any simulation of
that which is natural must sooner or later lead to nothing, or worse
than nothing. Even the rest-cures, the most simple and harmless of
the nerve restorers, serve a mistaken end. Patients go with nerves
tired and worn out with misuse,--commonly called over-work. Through
rest, Nature, with the warm, motherly help she is ever ready to
bring us, restores the worn body to a normal state; but its owner
has not learned to work the machine any better,--to drive his horses
more naturally, or with a gentler hand. He knows he must take life
more easily, but even with a passably good realization of that
necessity, he can practise it only to a certain extent; and most
occupants of rest-cures find themselves driven back more than once
for another "rest."

Nervous disorders, resulting from overwork are all about us. Extreme
nervous prostration is most prevalent. A thoughtful study of the
faces around us, and a better understanding of their lives, brings
to light many who are living, one might almost say, in a chronic
state of nervous prostration, which lasts for years before the break
comes. And because of the want of thought, the want of study for a
better, more natural use of the machine, few of us appreciate our
own possible powers. When with study the appreciation grows, it is a
daily surprise, a constantly increasing delight.

Extreme nervous tension seems to be so peculiarly American, that a
German physician coming to this country to practise became puzzled
by the variety of nervous disorders he was called upon to help, and
finally announced his discovery of a new disease which he chose to
call "Americanitis." And now we suffer from "Americanitis" in all
its unlimited varieties. Doctors study it; nerve medicines arise on
every side; nervine hospitals establish themselves; and rest-cures
innumerable spring up in all directions,--but the root of the matter
is so comparatively simple that in general it is overlooked
entirely.

When illnesses are caused by disobedience to the perfect laws of
Nature, a steady, careful obedience to these laws will bring us to a
healthful state again.

Nature is so wonderfully kind that if we go one-tenth of the way,
she will help us the other nine-tenths. Indeed she seems to be
watching and hoping for a place to get in, so quickly does she take
possession of us, if we do but turn toward her ever so little. But
instead of adopting her simple laws and following quietly her
perfect way, we try by every artificial means to gain a rapid
transit back to her dominion, and succeed only in getting farther
away from her. Where is the use of taking medicines to give us new
strength, while at the same time we are steadily disobeying the very
laws from the observance of which alone the strength can come? No
medicine can work in a man's-body while the man's habits are
constantly counteracting it. More harm than good is done in the end.
Where is the use of all the quieting medicines, if we only quiet our
nerves in order that we may continue to misuse them without their
crying out? They will cry out sooner or later; for Nature, who is so
quick to help us to the true way of living, loses patience at last,
and her punishments are justly severe. Or, we might better say, a
law is fixed and immovable, and if we disobey and continue to
disobey it, we suffer the consequences.






III.

REST IN SLEEP





HOW do we misuse our nervous force? First, let us consider, When
should the body be completely at rest? The longest and most perfect
rest should be during sleep at night. In sleep we can accomplish
nothing in the way of voluntary activity either of mind or body. Any
nervous or muscular effort during sleep is not only useless but
worse,--it is pure waste of fuel, and results in direct and
irreparable harm. Realizing fully that sleep is meant for rest, that
the only gain is rest, and that new power for use comes as a
consequence,--how absurd it seems that we do not abandon ourselves
completely to gaining all that Nature would give us through sleep.

Suppose, instead of eating our dinner, we should throw the food out
of the window, give it to the dogs, do anything with it but what
Nature meant we should, and then wonder why we were not nourished,
and why we suffered from faintness and want of strength. It would be
no more senseless than the way in which most of us try to sleep now,
and then wonder why we are not better rested from eight hours in
bed. Only this matter of fatiguing sleep has crept upon us so slowly
that we are blind to it. We disobey mechanically all the laws of
Nature in sleep, simple as they are, and are so blinded by our own
immediate and personal interests, that the habit of not resting when
we sleep has grown to such an extent that to return to natural
sleep, we must think, study, and practise.

Few who pretend to rest give up entirely to the bed, a dead
weight,--letting the bed hold them, instead of trying to hold
themselves on the bed. Watch, and unless you are an exceptional case
(of which happily there are a few), you will be surprised to see how
you are holding yourself on the bed, with tense muscles, if not all
over, so nearly all over that a little more tension would hardly
increase the fatigue with which you are working yourself to sleep.

The spine seems to be the central point of tension--it does not
_give_ to the bed and rest there easily from end to end; it touches
at each end and just so far along from each end as the man or woman
who is holding it will permit. The knees are drawn up, the muscles
of the legs tense, the hands and arms contracted, and the fingers
clinched, either holding the pillow or themselves.

The head, instead of letting the pillow have its full weight, holds
itself onto the pillow. The tongue cleaves to the roof of the mouth,
the throat muscles are contracted, and the muscles of the face drawn
up in one way or another.

This seems like a list of horrors, somewhat exaggerated when we
realize that it is of sleep, "Tired Nature's sweet restorer," that
we are speaking; but indeed it is only too true.

Of course cases are not in the majority where the being supposed to
enjoy repose is using _all_ these numerous possibilities of
contraction. But there are very few who have not, unconsciously,
some one or two or half-dozen nervous and muscular strains; and even
after they become conscious of the useless contractions, it takes
time and watchfulness and patience to relax out of them, the habit
so grows upon us. One would think that even though we go to sleep in
a tense way, after being once soundly off Nature could gain the
advantage over us, and relax the muscles in spite of ourselves; but
the habits of inheritance and of years are too much for her.
Although she is so constantly gracious and kind, she cannot go out
of her way, and we cannot ask her to do so.

How simple it seems to sleep in the right way; and how wholesome it
is even to think about it, in contrast to the wrong way into which
so many of us have fallen. If we once see clearly the great
compensation in getting back to the only way of gaining restful
sleep, the process is very simple, although because we were so far
out of the right path it often seems slow. But once gained, or even
partially gained, one great enemy to healthful, natural nerves is
conquered, and has no possibility of power.

Of course the mind and its rapid and misdirected working is a strong
preventive of free nerves, relaxed muscles, and natural sleep. "If I
could only stop myself from thinking" is a complaint often heard,
and reason or philosophy does not seem to touch it. Even the certain
knowledge that nothing is gained by this rapid thought at the wrong
time, that very much is lost, makes no impression on the overwrought
mind,--often even excites it more, which proves that the trouble, if
originally mental, has now gained such a hold upon the physique that
it must be attacked there first. The nerves should be trained to
enable the body to be an obedient servant to a healthy mind, and the
mind in giving its attention to such training gains in normal power
of direction.

If you cannot stop thinking, do not try; let your thoughts steam
ahead if they will. Only relax your muscles, and as the attention is
more and more fixed on the interesting process of letting-go of the
muscles (interesting, simply because the end is so well worth
gaining), the imps of thought find less and less to take hold of,
and the machinery in the head must stop its senseless working,
because the mind which allowed it to work has applied itself to
something worth accomplishing.

The body should also be at rest in necessary reclining in the day,
where of course all the laws of sleep apply. Five minutes of
complete rest in that way means greater gain than an hour or three
hours taken in the usual manner. I remember watching a woman
"resting" on a lounge, propped up with the downiest of pillows,
holding her head perfectly erect and in a strained position, when it
not only would have been easier to let it fall back on the pillow,
but it seemed impossible that she should not let it go; and yet
there it was, held erect with an evident strain. Hers is not an
unusual case, on the contrary quite a common one. Can we wonder that
the German doctor thought he had discovered a new disease? And must
he not be already surprised and shocked at the precocious growth of
the infant monster which he found and named? "So prone are mortals
to their own damnation, it seems as though a devil's use were gone."

There is no better way of learning to overcome these perversions in
sleep and similar forms of rest, than to study with careful thought
the sleep of a wholesome little child. Having gained the physical
freedom necessary to give perfect repose to the body, the quiet,
simple dropping of all thought and care can be made more easily
possible. So we can approach again the natural sleep and enjoy
consciously the refreshment which through our own babyhood was the
unconscious means of giving us daily strength and power for growth.

To take the regular process, first let go of the muscles,--that will
enable us more easily to drop disturbing thoughts; and as we refuse,
without resistance, admittance to the thoughts, the freedom from
care for the time will follow, and the rest gained will enable us to
awaken with new life for cares to come. This, however, is a habit to
be established and thoughtfully cultivated; it cannot be acquired at
once. More will be said in future chapters as to the process of
gaining the habit.






IV.

OTHER FORMS OF REST





DO you hold yourself on the chair, or does the chair hold you? When
you are subject to the laws of gravitation give up to them, and feel
their strength. Do not resist these laws, as a thousand and one of
us do when instead of yielding gently and letting ourselves sink
into a chair, we _put_ our bodies rigidly on and then hold them
there as if fearing the chair would break if we gave our full weight
to it. It is not only unnatural and unrestful, but most awkward. So
in a railroad car. Much, indeed most of the fatigue from a long
journey by rail is quite unnecessary, and comes from an unconscious
officious effort of trying to carry the train, instead of allowing
the train to carry us, or of resisting the motion, instead of
relaxing and yielding to it. There is a pleasant rhythm in the
motion of the rapidly moving cars which is often restful rather than
fatiguing, if we will only let go and abandon ourselves to it. This
was strikingly proved by a woman who, having just learned the first
principles of relaxation, started on a journey overstrained from
mental anxiety. The first effect of the motion was that most
disagreeable, faint feeling known as car-sickness. Understanding the
cause, she began at once to drop the unnecessary tension, and the
faintness left her. Then she commenced an interesting novel, and as
she became excited by the plot her muscles were contracted in
sympathy (so-called), and the faintness returned in full force, so
that she had to drop the book and relax again; and this process was
repeated half-a-dozen times before she could place her body so under
control of natural laws that it was possible to read without the
artificial tension asserting itself and the car-sickness returning
in consequence.

The same law is illustrated in driving. "I cannot drive, it tires me
so," is a common complaint. Why does it tire you? Because instead of
yielding entirely and freely to the seat of the carriage first, and
then to its motion, you try to help the horses, or to hold yourself
still while the carriage is moving. A man should become one with a
carriage in driving, as much as one with his horse in riding. Notice
the condition in any place where there is excuse for some
anxiety,--while going rather sharply round a corner, or nearing a
railroad track. If your feet are not pressed forcibly against the
floor of the carriage, the tension will be somewhere else. You are
using nervous force to no earthly purpose, and to great earthly
loss. Where any tension is necessary to make things better, it will
assert itself naturally and more truly as we learn to drop all
useless and harmful tension. Take a patient suffering from nervous
prostration for a long drive, and you will bring him back more
nervously prostrated; even the fresh air will not counteract the
strain that comes from not knowing how to relax to the motion of the
carriage.

A large amount of nervous energy is expended unnecessarily while
waiting. If we are obliged to wait for any length of time, it does
not hurry the minutes or bring that for which we wait to keep
nervously strained with impatience; and it does use vital force, and
so helps greatly toward "Americanitis." The strain which comes from
an hour's nervous waiting, when simply to let yourself alone and
keep still would answer much better, is often equal to a day's
labor. It must be left to individuals to discover how this applies
in their own especial cases, and it will be surprising to see not
only how great and how common such strain is, but how comparatively
easy it is to drop it. There are of course exceptional times and
states when only constant trying and thoughtful watchfulness will
bring any marked result.

We have taken a few examples where there is nothing to do but keep
quiet, body and brain, from what should be the absolute rest of
sleep to the enforced rest of waiting. Just one word more in
connection with waiting and driving. You must catch a certain train.
Not having time to trust to your legs or the cars, you hastily take
a cab. You will in your anxiety keep up exactly the same strain that
you would have had in walking,--as if you could help the carriage
along, or as if reaching the station in time depended upon your
keeping a rigid spine and tense muscles. You have hired the carriage
to take you, and any activity on your part is quite unnecessary
until you reach the station; why not keep quiet and let the horses
do the work, and the driver attend to his business?

It would be easy to fill a small volume with examples of the way in
which we are walking directly into nervous prostration; examples
only of this one variety of disobedience,--namely, of the laws of_
rest._ And to give illustrations of all the varieties of
disobedience to Nature's laws in _activity_ would fill not one small
book, but several large ones; and then, unless we improve, a
year-book of new examples of nervous strain could be published. But
fortunately, if we are nervous and short-sighted, we have a good
share of brain and commonsense when it is once appealed to, and a
few examples will open our eyes and set us thinking, to real and
practical results.






V.

THE USE OF THE BRAIN





LET us now consider instances where the brain alone is used, and the
other parts of the body have nothing to do but keep quiet and let
the brain do its work. Take thinking, for instance. Most of us think
with the throat so contracted that it is surprising there is room
enough to let the breath through, the tongue held firmly, and the
jaw muscles set as if suffering from an acute attack of lockjaw.
Each has his own favorite tension in the act of meditation, although
we are most generous in the force given to the jaw and throat. The
same superfluous tension may be observed in one engaged in silent
reading; and the force of the strain increases in proportion to the
interest or profundity of the matter read. It is certainly clear,
without a knowledge of anatomy or physiology, that for pure,
unadulterated thinking, only the brain is needed; and if vital force
is given to other parts of the body to hold them in unnatural
contraction; we not only expend it extravagantly, but we rob the
brain of its own. When, for purely mental work, all the activity is
given to the brain, and the body left free and passive, the
concentration is better, conclusions are reached with more
satisfaction, and the reaction, after the work is over, is healthy
and refreshing.

This whole machine can be understood perhaps more clearly by
comparing it to a community of people. In any community,--Church,
State, institution, or household,--just so far as each member minds
his own business, does his own individual work for himself and for
those about him, and does not officiously interfere with the
business of others, the community is quiet, orderly, and successful.
Imagine the state of a deliberative assembly during the delivery of
a speech, if half-a-dozen of the listeners were to attempt to help
the speaker by rising and talking at the same time; and yet this is
the absurd action of the human body when a dozen or more parts, that
are not needed, contract "in sympathy" with those that have the work
to do. It is an unnecessary brace that means loss of power and
useless fatigue. One would think that the human machine having only
one mind, and the community many thousands, the former would be in a
more orderly state than the latter.

In listening attentively, only the brain and ears are needed; but
watch the individuals at an entertaining lecture, or in church with
a stirring preacher. They are listening with their spines, their
shoulders, the muscles of their faces. I do not refer to the look of
interest and attention, or to any of the various expressions which
are the natural and true reflection of the state of the mind, but to
the strained attention which draws the facial muscles, not at all in
sympathy with the speaker, but as a consequence of the tense nerves
and contracted muscles of the listener. "I do not understand why I
have this peculiar sort of asthma every Sunday afternoon," a lady
said to me. She was in the habit of hearing, Sunday morning, a
preacher, exceedingly interesting, but with a very rapid utterance,
and whose mind travelled so fast that the words embodying his
thoughts often tumbled over one another. She listened with all her
nerves, as well as with those needed, held her breath when he
stumbled, to assist him in finding his verbal legs, reflected every
action with twice the force the preacher himself gave,--and then
wondered why on Sunday afternoon, and at no other time, she had this
nervous catching of the breath. She saw as soon as her attention was
drawn to the general principles of Nature, how she had disobeyed
this one, and why she had trouble on Sunday afternoon. This case is
very amusing, even laughable, but it is a fair example of many
similar nervous attacks, greater or less; and how easy it is to see
that a whole series of these, day after day, doing their work
unconsciously to the victim, will sooner or later bring some form of
nervous prostration.

The same attitudes and the same effects often attend listening to
music. It is a common experience to be completely fagged after two
hours of delightful music. There is no exaggeration in saying that
we should be _rested_ after a good concert, if it is not too long.
And yet so upside-down are we in our ways of living, and, through
the mistakes of our ancestors, so accustomed have we become to
disobeying Nature's laws, that the general impression seems to be
that music cannot be fully enjoyed without a strained attitude of
mind and body; whereas, in reality, it is much more exquisitely
appreciated and enjoyed in Nature's way. If the nerves are perfectly
free, they will catch the rhythm of the music, and so be helped back
to the true rhythm of Nature, they will respond to the harmony and
melody with all the vibratory power that God gave them, and how can
the result be anything else than rest and refreshment,--unless
having allowed them to vibrate in one direction too long, we have
disobeyed a law in another way.

Our bodies cannot by any possibility be _free,_ so long as they are
strained by our own personal effort. So long as our nervous force is
misdirected in personal strain, we can no more give full and
responsive attention to the music, than a piano can sound the
harmonies of a sonata if some one is drawing his hands at the same
time backwards and forwards over the strings. But, alas! a
contracted personality is so much the order of the day that many of
us carry the chronic contractions of years constantly with us, and
can no more free ourselves for a concert at a day's or a week's
notice, than we can gain freedom to receive all the grand universal
truths that are so steadily helpful. It is only by daily patience
and thought and care that we can cease to be an obstruction to the
best power for giving and receiving.

There are, scattered here and there, people who have not lost the
natural way of listening to music,--people who are musicians through
and through so that the moment they hear a fine strain they are one
with it. Singularly enough the majority of these are fine animals,
most perfectly and normally developed in their senses. When the
intellect begins to assert itself to any extent, then the nervous
strain comes. So noticeable is this, in many cases, that nervous
excitement seems often to be from misdirected intellect; and people
under the control of their misdirected nervous force often appear
wanting in quick intellectual power,--illustrating the law that a
stream spreading in all directions over a meadow loses the force
that the same amount of water would have if concentrated and flowing
in one channel. There are also many cases where the strained nerves
bring an abnormal intellectual action. Fortunately for the saving of
the nation, there are people who from a physical standpoint live
naturally. These are refreshing to see; but they are apt to take
life too easily, to have no right care or thought, and to be
sublimely selfish.

Another way in which the brain is constantly used is through the
eyes. What deadly fatigue comes from time spent in picture
galleries! There the strain is necessarily greater than in
listening, because all the pictures and all the colors are before us
at once, with no appreciable interval between forms and subjects
that differ widely. But as the strain is greater, so should the care
to relieve it increase. We should not go out too far to meet the
pictures, but be quiet, and let the pictures come to us. The fatigue
can be prevented if we know when to stop, and pleasure at the time
and in the memory afterwards will be surprisingly increased. So is
it in watching a landscape from the car window, and in all interests
which come from looking. I am not for one instant condemning the
_natural_ expression of pleasure, neither do I mean that there
should be any apparent nonchalance or want of interest; on the
contrary, the real interest and its true expression increase as we
learn to shun the shams.

But will not the discovery of all this superfluous tension make one
self-conscious? Certainly it will for a time, and it must do so. You
must be conscious of a smooch on your face in order to wash it off,
and when the face is clean you think no more of it. So you must see
an evil before you can shun it. All these physical evils you must be
vividly conscious of, and when you are so annoyed as to feel the
necessity of moving from under them self-consciousness decreases in
equal ratio with the success of your efforts.

Whenever the brain alone is used in thinking, or in receiving and
taking note of impressions through either of the senses, new power
comes as we gain freedom from all misdirected force, and with
muscles in repose leave the brain to quietly do its work without
useless strain of any kind. It is of course evident that this
freedom cannot be gained without, first, a consciousness of its
necessity. The perfect freedom, however, when reached, means freedom
from self-consciousness as well as from the strain which made
self-consciousness for a time essential.






VI.

THE BRAIN IN ITS DIRECTION OF THE BODY





WE come now to the brain and its direction of other parts of the
body.

What tremendous and unnecessary force is used in talking,--from the
aimless motion of the hands, the shoulders, the feet, the entire
body, to a certain rigidity of carriage, which tells as powerfully
in the wear and tear of the nervous system as superfluous motion. It
is a curious discovery when we find often how we are holding our
shoulders in place, and in the wrong place. A woman receiving a
visitor not only talks all over herself, but reflects the visitor's
talking all over, and so at the end of the visit is doubly fatigued.
"It tires me so to see people" is heard often, not only from those
who are under the full influence of "Americanitis," but from many
who are simply hovering about its borders. "Of course it tires you
to see people, you see them with, so much superfluous effort," can
almost without exception be a true answer. A very little simple
teaching will free a woman from that unnecessary fatigue. If she is
sensible, once having had her attention brought and made keenly
alive to the fact that she talks all over, she will through
constant correction gain the power of talking as Nature meant she
should, with her vocal apparatus only, and with such easy motions as
may be needed to illustrate her words. In this change, so far from
losing animation, she gains it, and gains true expressive power; for
all unnecessary motion of the body in talking simply raises a dust,
so to speak, and really blurs the true thought of the mind and
feeling of the heart.

The American voice--especially the female voice--is a target which
has been hit hard many times, and very justly. A ladies' luncheon
can often be truly and aptly compared to a poultry-yard, the shrill
cackle being even more unpleasant than that of a large concourse of
hens. If we had once become truly appreciative of the natural mellow
tones possible to every woman, these shrill voices would no more be
tolerated than a fashionable luncheon would be served in the
kitchen.

A beautiful voice has been compared to corn, oil, and wine. We lack
almost entirely the corn and the oil; and the wine in our voices is
far more inclined to the sharp, unpleasant taste of very poor
currant wine, than to the rich, spicy flavor of fine wine from the
grape. It is not in the province of this book to consider the
physiology of the voice, which would be necessary in order to show
clearly how its natural laws are constantly disobeyed. We can now
speak of it only with regard to the tension which is the immediate
cause of the trouble. The effort to propel the voice from the
throat, and use force in those most delicate muscles when it should
come from the stronger muscles of the diaphragm, is like trying to
make one man do the work of ten; the result must eventually be the
utter collapse of the one man from over-activity, and loss of power
in the ten men because of muscles unused. Clergyman's sore throat is
almost always explainable in this way; and there are many laymen
with constant trouble in the throat from no cause except the misuse
of its muscles in talking. "The old philosopher said the seat of the
soul was in the diaphragm. However that may be, the word begins
there, soul and body; but you squeeze the life out of it in your
throat, and so your words are born dead!" was the most expressive
exclamation of an able trainer of the voice.

Few of us feel that we can take the time or exercise the care for
the proper training of our voices; and such training is not made a
prominent feature, as it should be, in all American schools. Indeed,
if it were, we would have to begin with the teachers; for the
typical teacher's voice, especially in our public schools, coming
from unnecessary nervous strain is something frightful. In a large
school-room a teacher can be heard, and more impressively heard, in
common conversational tones; for then it is her mind that is felt
more than her body. But the teacher's voice mounts the scale of
shrillness and force just in proportion as her nervous fatigue
increases; and often a true enthusiasm expresses itself--or, more
correctly, hides itself--in a sharp, loud voice, when it would be
far more effective in its power with the pupils if the voice were
kept quiet. If we cannot give time or money to the best development
of our voices, we can grow sensitive to the shrill, unpleasant
tones, and by a constant preaching of "lower your voices," "speak
more quietly," from the teacher to herself, and then to her pupils,
from mother to child, and from every woman to her own voice, the
standard American voice would change, greatly to the national
advantage.

I never shall forget the restful pleasure of hearing a teacher call
the roll in a large schoolroom as quietly as she would speak to a
child in a closet, and every girl answering in the same soft and
pleasant way. The effect even of that daily roll-call could not have
been small in its counteracting influence on the shrill American
tone.

Watch two people in an argument, as the excitement increases the
voice rises. In such a case one of the best and surest ways to
govern your temper is to lower your voice. Indeed the nervous system
and the voice are in such exquisite sympathy that they constantly
act and react on each other. It is always easier to relax
superfluous tension after lowering the voice.

"Take the bone and flesh sound from your voice" is a simple and
interesting direction. It means do not push so hard with your body
and so interfere with the expression of your soul. Thumping on a
piano, or hard scraping on a violin, will keep all possible
expression from the music, and in just the same proportion will
unnecessary physical force hide the soul in a voice. Indeed with the
voice--because the instrument is finer--the contrast between
Nature's way and man's perversion is far greater.

One of the first cares with a nervous invalid, or with any one who
suffers at all from overstrained nerves, should be for a quiet,
mellow voice. It is not an invariable truth that women with poorly
balanced nerves have shrill, strained voices. There is also a rigid
tone in a nervously low voice, which, though not unpleasant to the
general ear, is expressive to one who is in the habit of noticing
nervous people, and is much more difficult to relax than the high
pitched voices. There is also a forced calm which is tremendous in
its nervous strain, the more so as its owner takes pride in what she
considers remarkable self-control.

Another common cause of fatigue with women is the useless strain in
sewing. "I get so tired in the back of my neck" is a frequent
complaint. "It is because you sew with the back of your neck" is
generally the correct explanation. And it is because you sew with
the muscles of your waist that they feel so strangely fatigued, and
the same with the muscles of your legs or your chest. Wherever the
tired feeling comes it is because of unnatural and officious
tension, which, as soon as the woman becomes sensible of it, can be
stopped entirely by taking two or three minutes now and then to let
go of these wrongly sympathetic muscles and so teach them to mind
their own business, and sew with only the muscles that are needed. A
very simple cause of over-fatigue in sewing is the cramped, strained
position of the lungs; this can be prevented without even stopping
in the work, by taking long, quiet, easy breaths. Here there must be
_no exertion whatever_ in the chest muscles. The lungs must seem to
expand from the pressure of the air alone, as independently as a
rubber ball will expand when external pressure is removed, and they
must be allowed to expel the air with the same independence. In this
way the growth of breathing power will be slow, but it will be sure
and delightfully restful. Frequent, full, quiet breaths might be the
means of relief to many sufferers, if only they would take the
trouble to practise them faithfully,--a very slight effort compared
with the result which will surely ensue. And so it is with the
fatigue from sewing. I fear I do not exaggerate, when I say that in
nine cases out of ten a woman would rather sew with a pain in her
neck than stop for the few moments it would take to relax it and
teach it truer habits, so that in the end the pain might be avoided
entirely. Then, when the inevitable nervous exhaustion follows, and
all the kindred troubles that grow out of it she pities herself and
is pitied by others, and wonders why God thought best to afflict her
with suffering and illness. "Thought best!" God never thought best
to give any one pain. He made His laws, and they are wholesome and
perfect and true, and if we disobey them we must suffer the
consequences! I knock my head hard against a stone and then wonder
why God thought best to give me the headache. There would be as much
sense in that as there is in much of the so-called Christian
resignation to be found in the world to-day. To be sure there are
inherited illnesses and pains, physical and mental, but the laws are
so made that the compensation of clear-sightedness and power for use
gained by working our way rightly out of all inheritances and
suffering brought by others, fully equalizes any apparent loss.

In writing there is much unnecessary nervous fatigue. The same
cramped attitude of the lungs that accompanies sewing can be
counteracted in the same way, although in neither case should a
cramped attitude be allowed at all Still the relief of a long breath
is always helpful and even necessary where one must sit in one
position for any length of time. Almost any even moderately nervous
man or woman will hold a pen as if some unseen force were trying to
pull it away, and will write with firmly set jaw, contracted throat,
and a powerful tension in the muscles of the tongue, or whatever
happens to be the most officious part of this especial individual
community. To swing the pendulum to another extreme seems not to
enter people's minds when trying to find a happy medium. Writer's
paralysis, or even the ache that comes from holding the hand so long
in a more or less cramped attitude, is easily obviated by stopping
once in an hour or half hour, stretching the fingers wide and
letting the muscles slowly relax of their own accord. Repeat this
half-a-dozen times, and after each exercise try to hold the pen or
pencil with natural lightness; it will not take many days to change
the habit of tension to one of ease, although if you are a steady
writer the stretching exercise will always be necessary, but much
less often than at first.

In lifting a heavyweight, as in nursing the sick, the relief is
immediate from all straining in the back, by pressing hard with the
feet on the floor and _thinking_ the power of lifting in the legs.
There is true economy of nervous force here, and a sensitive spine
is freed from a burden of strain which might undoubtedly be the
origin of nervous prostration. I have made nurses practise lifting,
while impressing the fact forcibly upon them by repetition before
they lift, and during the process of raising a body and lowering it,
that they must use entirely the muscles of the legs. When once their
minds have full comprehension of the new way, the surprise with
which they discover the comparative ease of lifting is very
pleasant. The whole secret in this and all similar efforts is to use
muscular instead of nervous force. Direct with the directing power;
work with the working power.






VII.

THE DIRECTION OF THE BODY IN LOCOMOTION





LIFTING brings us to the use of the entire body, which is considered
simply in the most common of all its movements,--that of walking.

The rhythm of a perfect walk is not only delightful, but restful; so
that having once gained a natural walk there is no pleasanter way to
rest from brain fatigue than by means of this muscle fatigue. And
yet we are constantly contradicting and interfering with Nature in
walking. Women--perhaps partly owing to their unfortunate style of
dress--seem to hold themselves together as if fearing that having
once given their muscles free play, they would fall to pieces
entirely. Rather than move easily forward, and for fear they might
tumble to pieces, they shake their shoulders and hips from side to
side, hold their arms perfectly rigid from the shoulders down, and
instead of the easy, natural swing that the motion of walking would
give the arms, they go forward and back with no regularity, but are
in a chronic state of jerk. The very force used in holding an arm as
stiff as the ordinary woman holds it, would be enough to give her an
extra mile in every five-mile walk. Then again, the muscles of the
throat must help, and more than anywhere else is force unnecessarily
expended in the waist muscles. They can be very soon felt, pushing
with all their might--and it is not a small might--officiously
trying to assist in the action of the legs; whereas if they would
only let go, mind their own business, and let the legs swing easily
as if from the shoulders, they might reflect the rhythmic motion,
and gain in a true freedom and power. Of course all this waste of
force comes from nervous strain and is nervous strain, and a long
walk in the open air, when so much of the new life gained is wrongly
expended, does not begin to do the good work that might be
accomplished. To walk with your muscles and not use superfluous
nervous force is the first thing to be learned, and after or at the
same time to direct your muscles as Nature meant they should be
directed,--indeed we might almost say to let Nature direct them
herself, without our interference. Hurry with your muscles and not
with your nerves. This tells especially in hurrying for a train,
where the nervous anxiety in the fear of losing it wakes all
possible unnecessary tension and often impedes the motion instead of
assisting it. The same law applies here that was mentioned before
with regard to the carriage,--only instead of being quiet and
letting the carriage take you, be quiet and let your walking machine
do its work. So in all hurrying, and the warning can hardly be given
too many times, we must use our nerves only as transmitters--calm,
well-balanced transmitters--that our muscles may be more efficient
and more able servants.

The same mistakes of unnecessary tension will be found in running,
and, indeed, in all bodily motion, where the machine is not trained
to do its work with only the nerves and muscles needed for the
purpose. We shall have opportunity to consider these motions in a
new light when we come to the directions for gaining a power of
natural motion; now we are dealing only with mistakes.






VIII.

NERVOUS STRAIN IN PAIN AND SICKNESS





THERE is no way in which superfluous and dangerous tension is so
rapidly increased as in the bearing of pain. The general impression
seems to be that one should brace up to a pain; and very great
strength of will is often shown in the effort made and the success
achieved in bearing severe pain by means of this bracing process.
But alas, the reaction after the pain is over--that alone would show
the very sad misuse which had been made of a strong will. Not that
there need be no reaction; but it follows naturally that the more
strain brought to bear upon the nervous system in endurance, the
greater must be the reaction when the load is lifted. Indeed, so
well is this known in the medical profession, that it is a surgical
axiom that the patient who most completely controls his expression
of pain will be the greatest sufferer from the subsequent reaction.
While there is so much pain to be endured in this world, a study of
how best to bear it certainly is not out of place, especially when
decided practical effects can be quickly shown as the result of such
study. So prevalent is the idea that a pain is better borne by
clinching the fists and tightening all other muscles in the body
correspondingly, that I know the possibility of a better or more
natural mode of endurance will be laughed at by many, and others
will say, "That is all very well for those who can relax to a
pain,--let them gain from it, I cannot; it is natural for me to set
my teeth and bear it." There is a distinct difference between what
is natural to us and natural to Nature, although the first term is
of course misused.

Pain comes from an abnormal state of some part of the nervous
system. The more the nerves are strained to bear pain, the more
sensitive they become; and of course those affected immediately feel
most keenly the increased sensitiveness, and so the pain grows
worse. Reverse that action, and through the force of our own
inhibitory power let a new pain be a reminder to us to _let go,_
instead of to hold on, and by decreasing the strain we decrease the
possibility of more pain. Whatever reaction may follow pain then,
will be reaction from the pain itself, not from the abnormal tension
which has been held for the purpose of bearing it.

But--it will be objected--is not the very effort of the brain to
relax the tension a nervous strain? Yes, it is,--not so great,
however, as the continued tension all over the body, and it grows
less and less as the habit is acquired of bearing the pain easily.
The strain decreases more rapidly with those who having undertaken
to relax, perceive the immediate effects; for, of course, as the
path clears and new light comes they are encouraged to walk more
steadily in the easier way.

I know there are pains that are better borne and even helped by a
certain amount of _bracing,_ but if the idea of bearing such pain
quietly, easily, naturally, takes a strong hold of the mind, all
bracing will be with a true equilibrium of the muscles, and will
have the required effect without superfluous tension.

One of the most simple instances of bearing pain more easily by
relaxing to it occurs while sitting in the dentist's chair. Most of
us clutch the arms, push with our feet, and hold ourselves off the
chair to the best of our ability. Every nerve is alive with the
expectation of being hurt.

The fatigue which results from an hour or more of this dentist
tension is too well known to need description. Most of the nervous
fatigue suffered from the dentist's work is in consequence of the
unnecessary strain of expecting a hurt and not from any actual pain
inflicted. The result obtained by insisting upon making yourself a
dead weight in the chair, if you succeed only partially, will prove
this. It will also be a preliminary means of getting well rid of the
dentist fright,--that peculiar dread which is so well known to most
of us. The effect of fright is nervous strain, which again contracts
the muscles. If we drop the muscular tension, and so the nervous
strain, thus working our way into the cause by means of the effect,
there will be no nerves or muscles to hold the fright, which then so
far as the physique is concerned cannot exist. _So far as the
physique is concerned,--_that is emphatic; for as we work inward
from the effect to the cause we must be met by the true philosophy
inside, to accomplish the whole work. I might relax my body out of
the nervous strain of fright all day; if my mind insisted upon being
frightened it would simply be a process of freeing my nerves and
muscles that they might be made more effectually tense by an
unbalanced, miserably controlled mind. In training to bring body and
mind to a more normal state, the teacher must often begin with the
body only, and use his own mind to gently lead the pupil to clearer
sight. Then when the pupil can strike the equilibrium between mind
and body,--he must be left to acquire the habit for himself.

The same principles by which bearing the work of the dentist is made
easier, are applicable in all pain, and especially helpful when pain
is nervously exaggerated. It would be useless and impossible to
follow the list of various pains which we attempt to bear by means
of additional strain.

Each of us has his own personal temptation in the way of pain,--from
the dentist's chair to the most severe suffering, or the most
painful operation,--and each can apply for himself the better way of
bearing it. And it is not perhaps out of place here to speak of the
taking of ether or any anaesthetic before an operation. The power of
relaxing to the process easily and quietly brings a quicker and
pleasanter effect with less disagreeable results. One must take
ether easily in mind and body. It a man forces himself to be quiet
externally, and is frightened and excited mentally, as soon as he
has become unconscious enough to lose control of his voluntary
muscles, the impression of fright made upon the brain asserts
itself, and he struggles and resists in proportion.

These same principles of repose should be applied in illness when it
comes in other forms than that of pain. We can easily increase
whatever illness may attack us by the nervous strain which comes
from fright, anxiety, or annoyance. I have seen a woman retain a
severe cold for days more than was necessary, simply because of the
chronic state of strain she kept herself in by fretting about it;
and in another unpleasantly amusing case the sufferer's constantly
expressed annoyance took the form of working almost without
intermission to find remedies for herself. Without using patience
enough to wait for the result of one remedy, she would rush to
another until she became--so to speak--twisted and snarled in the
meshes of a cold which it took weeks thoroughly to cure. This is not
uncommon, and not confined merely to a cold in the head.

We can increase the suffering of friends through "sympathy" given in
the same mistaken way by which we increase our own pain, or keep
ourselves longer than necessary in an uncomfortable illness.






IX.

NERVOUS STRAIN IN THE EMOTIONS





THE most intense suffering which follows a misuse of the nervous
power comes from exaggerated, unnecessary, or sham emotions. We each
have our own emotional microscope, and the strength of its lens
increases in proportion to the supersensitiveness of our nervous
system. If we are a little tired, an emotion which in itself might
hardly be noticed, so slight is the cause and so small the result,
will be magnified many times. If we are very tired, the magnifying
process goes on until often we have made ourselves ill through
various sufferings, all of our own manufacture.

This increase of emotion has not always nervous fatigue as an
excuse. Many people have inherited emotional magnifying glasses, and
carry them through the world, getting and giving unnecessary pain,
and losing more than half of the delight of life in failing to get
an unprejudiced view of it. If the tired man or woman would have the
good sense to stop for one minute and use the power which is given
us all of understanding and appreciating our own perverted states
and so move on to better, how easy it would be to recognize that a
feeling is exaggerated because of fatigue, and wait until we have
gained the power to drop our emotional microscopes and save all the
evil results of allowing nervous excitement to control us. We are
even permitted to see clearly an inherited tendency to magnify
emotions and to overcome it to such an extent that life seems new to
us. This must be done by the individual himself, through a personal
appreciation of his own mistakes and active steps to free himself
from them. No amount of talking, persuading, or teaching will be of
the slightest service until that personal recognition comes. This
has been painfully proved too often by those who see a friend
suffering unnecessarily, and in the short-sighted attempt to wrench
the emotional microscope from his hand, simply cause the hold to
tighten and the magnifying power to increase. A careful, steady
training of the physique opens the way for a better practice of the
wholesome philosophy, and the microscope drops with the relaxation
of the external tension which has helped to hold it.

Emotions are often not even exaggerated but are from the beginning
imaginary; and there are no more industrious imps of evil than these
sham feelings. The imps have no better field for their destructive
work than in various forms of morbid, personal attachment, and in
what is commonly called religion,--but which has no more to do with
genuine religion than the abnormal personal likings have to do with
love.

It is a fact worthy of notice that the two powers most helpful, most
strengthening, when sincerely felt and realized, are the ones
oftenest perverted and shammed, through morbid states and abnormal
nervous excitement. The sham is often so perfect an image of the
reality that even the shammer is deceived.

To tell one of these pseudo-religious women that the whole attitude
of her externally sanctified life is a sham emotion, would rouse
anything but a saintly spirit, and surprise her beyond measure. Yet
the contrast between the true, healthful, religious feeling and the
sham is perfectly marked, even though both classes follow the same
forms and belong to the same charitable societies. With the one,
religion seems to be an accomplishment, with a rivalry as to who can
carry it to the finest point; with the other, it is a steadily
growing power of wholesome use.

This nervous strain from sham emotions, it must be confessed, is
more common to the feminine nature. So dangerously prevalent is it
that in every girls' school a true repression of the sham and a
development of real feeling should be the thoughtful, silent effort
of all the teachers. Any one who knows young girls feels deeply the
terrible harm which comes to them in the weakening of their
delicate, nervous systems through morbid, emotional excitement. The
emotions are vividly real to the girls, but entirely sham in
themselves. Great care must be taken to respect the sense of reality
which a young girl has in these mistakes, until she can be led out
so far that she herself recognizes the sham; then will come a
hearty, wholesome desire to be free from it.

A school governed by a woman with strong "magnetism," and an equally
strong love of admiration and devotion, can be kept in a chronic
state of hysteria by the emotional affection of the girls for their
teacher. When they cannot reach the teacher they will transfer the
feeling to one another. Where this is allowed to pervade the
atmosphere of a girls' school, those who escape floods of tears or
other acute hysterical symptoms are the dull, phlegmatic
temperaments.

Often a girt will go from one of these morbid attachments to
another, until she seems to have lost the power for a good,
wholesome affection. Strange as it may seem, the process is a steady
hardening of the heart. The same result comes to man or woman who
has followed a series of emotional flirtations,--the perceptions are
dulled, and the whole tone of the system, mental and physical, is
weakened. The effect is in exact correspondence in another degree
with the result which follows an habitual use of stimulants.

Most abnormal emotional states are seen in women--and sometimes in
men--who believe themselves in love. The suffering is to them very
real. It seems cruel to say, "My dear, you are not in the least in
love with that man; you are in love with your own emotions. If some
one more attractive should appear, you could at once transfer your
emotional tortures to the seemingly more worthy object." Such ideas
need not be flung in so many words at a woman, but she may be gently
led until she sees clearly for herself the mistake, and will even
laugh at the morbid sensations that before seemed to her terribly
real.

How many foolish, almost insane actions of men and women come from
sham emotions and the nervous excitement generated by them, or from
nervous excitement and the sham emotions that result in consequence!

Care should be taken first to change the course of the nervous power
that is expressing itself morbidly, to open for it a healthy outlet,
to guide it into that more wholesome channel, and then help the
owner to a better control and a clearer understanding, that she may
gain a healthy use of her wonderful nervous power. A gallop on
horseback, a good swim, fresh air taken with any form of wholesome
fun and exercise is the way to begin if possible. A woman who has
had all the fresh air and interesting exercise she needs, will shake
off the first sign of morbid emotions as she would shake off a rat
or any other vermin.

To one who is interested to study the possible results of
misdirected nervous power, nothing could illustrate it with more
painful force than the story by Rudyard Kipling, "In the Matter of a
Private."

Real emotions, whether painful or delightful, leave one eventually
with a new supply of strength; the sham, without exception, leave
their victim weaker, physically and mentally, unless they are
recognized as sham, and voluntarily dismissed by the owner of the
nerves that have been rasped by them. It is an inexpressibly sad
sight to see a woman broken, down and an invalid, for no reason
whatever but the unnecessary nervous excitement of weeks and months
of sham emotion. Hardly too strong an appeal can be made to mothers
and teachers for a careful watchfulness of their girls, that their
emotions be kept steadily wholesome, so that they may grow and
develop into that great power for use and healthful sympathy which
always belongs to a woman of fine feeling.

There is a term used in college which describes most expressively an
intense nervous excitement and want of control,--namely, "dry
drunk." It has often seemed to me that sham emotions are a woman's
form of getting drunk, and nervous prostration is its delirium
tremens. Not the least of the suffering caused by emotional
excitement comes from mistaken sympathy with others. Certain people
seem to live on the principle that if a friend is in a swamp, it is
necessary to plunge in with him; and that if the other man is up to
his waist, the sympathizer shows his friendliness by allowing the
mud to come up to his neck. Whereas, it is evident that the deeper
my friend is immersed in a swamp, the more sure I must be to keep on
firm ground that I may help him out; and sometimes I cannot even
give my hand, but must use a long pole, the more surely to relieve
him from danger. It is the same with a mental or moral swamp, or
most of all with a nervous swamp, and yet so little do people
appreciate the use of this long pole that if I do not cry when my
friend cries, moan when my friend moans, and persistently refuse to
plunge into the same grief that I may be of more real use in helping
him out of it, I am accused by my friend and my friend's friend of
coldness and want of sympathy. People have been known to refuse the
other end of your pole because you will not leave it and come into
the swamp with them.

It is easy to see why this mistaken sympathy is the cause of great
unnecessary nervous strain. The head nurse of a hospital in one of
our large cities was interrupted while at dinner by the deep
interest taken by the other nurses in seeing an accident case
brought in. When the man was put out of sight the nurses lost their
appetite from sympathy; and the forcible way with which their
superior officer informed them that if they had any real sympathy
for the man they would eat to gain strength to serve him, gave a
lesson by which many nervous sympathizers could greatly profit.

Of course it is possible to become so hardened that you "eat your
dinner" from a want of feeling, and to be consumed only with
sympathy for yourself; but it is an easy matter to make the
distinction between a strong, wholesome sympathy and selfish want of
feeling, and easier to distinguish between the sham sympathy and the
real. The first causes you to lose nervous strength, the second
gives you new power for wholesome use to others.

In all the various forms of nervous strain, which we study to avoid,
let us realize and turn from false sympathy as one to be especially
and entirely shunned.

Sham emotions are, of course, always misdirected force; but it is
not unusual to see a woman suffering from nervous prostration caused
by nervous power lying idle. This form of invalidism comes to women
who have not enough to fill their lives in necessary interest and
work, and have not thought of turning or been willing to turn their
attention to some needed charity or work for others. A woman in this
state is like a steam-engine with the fire in full blast, and the
boiler shaking with the power of steam not allowed to escape in
motive force.

A somewhat unusual example of this is a young woman who had been
brought up as a nervous invalid, had been through nervous
prostration once, and was about preparing for another attack, when
she began to work for a better control of her nervous force. After
gaining a better use of her machine, she at once applied its power
to work,--gradually at first and then more and more, until she found
herself able to endure what others had to give up as beyond their
strength.

The help for these, and indeed for all cases, is to make the life
objective instead of subjective. "Look out, not in; look up, not
down; lend a hand," is the motto that must be followed gently and
gradually, but _surely,_ to cure or to prevent a case of
"Americanitis."

But again, good sense and care must be taken to preserve the
equilibrium; for nervous tension and all the suffering that it
brings come more often from mistaken devotion to others than from a
want of care for them. Too many of us are trying to make special
Providences of ourselves for our friends. To say that this
short-sighted martyrdom is not only foolish but selfish seems hard,
but a little thought will show it to be so.

A woman sacrifices her health in over-exertion for a friend. If she
does not distress the object of her devotion entirely out of
proportion to the use she performs, she at least unfits herself, by
over-working, for many other uses, and causes more suffering than
she saves. So are the great ends sacrificed to the smaller.

"If you only knew how hard I am trying to do right" comes with a
strained face and nervous voice from many and many a woman. If she
could only learn in this case, as in others, of "vaulting ambition
that o'er-leaps itself and falls upon the other side;" if she could
only realize that the very strained effort with which she tries,
makes it impossible for her to gain,--if she would only "relax" to
whatever she has to do, and then try, the gain would be
incomparable.

The most intense sufferers from nervous excitement are those who
suppress any sign of their feeling. The effort to "hold in"
increases the nervous strain immensely. As in the case of one
etherized, who has suppressed fright which he feels very keenly, as
soon as the voluntary muscles are relaxed the impression on the
brain shows itself with all the vehemence of the feeling,--so when
the muscles are consciously relaxed the nervous excitement bursts
forth like the eruption of a small volcano, and for a time is a
surprise to the man or woman who has been in a constant effort of
suppression.

The contrast between true self-control and that which is merely
repressed feeling, is, like all contrast between the natural and the
artificial, immeasurable; and the steadily increasing power to be
gained by true self-control cannot be conveyed in words, but must be
experienced in actual use.

Many of us know with what intense force a temper masters us when,
having held in for some time, some spring is touched which makes
silence impossible, and the sense of relief which follows a volley
of indignant words. To say that we can get a far greater and more
lasting relief without a word, but simply through relaxing our
muscles and freeing our excited nerves, seems tame; but it is
practically true, and is indeed the only way from a physical
standpoint that one may be sure of controlling a high temper. In
that way, also, we keep the spirit, the power, the strength, from
which the temper comes, and so far from being tame, life has more
for us. We do not tire ourselves and lose nervous force through the
wear and tear of losing our temper. To speak expressively, if not
scientifically, Let go, and let the temper slip over your nerves and
off,--you do not lose it then, for you know where it is, and you
keep all the nervous force that would have been used in suppression
or expression for better work.

That, the reader will say, is not so easy as it sounds. Granted,
there must be the desire to get a true control of the temper; but
most of us have that desire, and while we cannot expect immediate
success, steady practice will bring startling results sooner than we
realize. There must be a clear, intelligent understanding of what we
are aiming at, and how to gain it; but that is not difficult, and
once recognized grows steadily as we gain practical results. Let the
first feeling of anger be a reminder to "let go." But you will say,
"I do not want to let go,"--only because your various grandfathers
and grandmothers were unaccustomed to relieving themselves in that
manner. When we give way to anger and let it out in a volley of
words, there is often a sense of relief, but more often a reaction
which is most unpleasant, and is greatly increased by the pain given
to others. The relief is certain if we "relax;" and not only is
there then no painful reaction, but we gain a clear head to
recognize the justice or injustice of our indignation, and to see
what can be done about its cause.

Petty irritability can be met in the same way. As with nervous pain
it seems at first impossible to "relax to it;" but the Rubicon once
crossed, we cannot long be irritable,--it is so much simpler not to
be, and so much more comfortable.

If when we are tempted to fly into a rage or to snap irritably at
others we could go through a short process of relaxing motions, the
effect would be delightful. But that would be ridiculous; and we
must do our relaxing in the privacy of the closet and recall it when
needed outside, that we may relax without observation except in its
happy results. I know people will say that anything to divert the
mind will cure a high temper or irritability. That is only so to a
limited extent; and so far as it is so, simply proves the best
process of control. Diversion relieves the nervous excitement,
turning the attention in another direction,--and so is relaxing so
far as it goes.

Much quicker and easier than self-control is the control which
allows us to meet the irritability of others without echoing it. The
temptation to echo a bad temper or an irritable disposition in
others, we all know; but the relief which comes to ourselves and to
the sufferer as we quietly relax and refuse to reflect it, is a
sensation that many of us have yet to experience. One keeps a clear
head in that way, not to mention a charitable heart; saves any
quantity of nervous strain, and keeps off just so much tendency to
nervous prostration.

Practically the way is opened to this better control through a
physical training which gives us the power of relaxing at will, and
so of maintaining a natural, wholesome equilibrium of nerves and
muscles.

Personal sensitiveness is, to a great degree, a form of nervous
tension. An individual case of the relief of this sensitiveness,
although laughable in the means of cure, is so perfectly
illustrative of it that it is worth telling. A lady who suffered
very much from having her feelings hurt came to me for advice. I
told her whenever anything was said to wound her, at once to imagine
her legs heavy,--that relaxed her muscles, freed her nerves, and
relieved the tension caused by her sensitive feelings. The cure
seemed to her wonderful. It would not have done for her to think a
table heavy, or a chair, or to have diverted her mind in any other
way, for it was the effect of relaxation in her own body that she
wanted, which came from persistently thinking her legs heavy.
Neither could her sensitiveness have taken a very deep hold, or mere
outside relaxation would not have reached it; but that outside
process had the effect of greatly assisting in the power to use a
higher philosophy with the mind.

Self-consciousness and all the personal annoyances that come with or
follow it are to so great an extent nervous tension, that the ease
with which they may be helped seems sometimes like a miracle to
those who study for a better guidance of their bodies.

Of worries, from the big worries with a real foundation to the
miserable, petty, nagging worries that wear a woman's nervous system
more than any amount of steady work, there is so much to be said
that it would prove tedious, and indeed unnecessary to recount them.
A few words will suggest enough toward their remedy to those who are
looking in the right direction, and to others many words would be of
no avail.

The petty worries are the most wearing, and they fortunately are the
most easily helped. By relaxing the muscular contractions invariably
accompanying them we seem to make an open channel, and they slip
through,--which expression I am well aware is not scientific. The
common saying, "Cares roll off her like water off a duck's back,"
means the same thing. Some human ducks are made with backs eminently
fitted for cares to slip from; but those whose backs seem to be made
to hold the cares can remould themselves to the right proportions,
and there is great compensation in their appreciation of the
contrast.

Never resist a worry. It is increased many times by the effort to
overcome it. The strain of the effort makes it constantly more
difficult to drop the strain of the worry. When we quietly go to
work to relax the muscles and so quiet the nerves, ignoring a worry,
the way in which it disappears is surprising. Then is the time to
meet it with a broad philosophizing on the uselessness of worry,
etc., and "clinch" our freedom, so to speak.

It is not at the first attempt to relax, or the second, or the
ninth, that the worry will disappear for many of us, and especially
for worriers. It takes many hours to learn what relaxing is; but
having once learned, its helpful power is too evident for us not to
keep at it, if we really desire to gain our freedom.

To give the same direction to a worrier that was so effective with
the woman whose feelings were easily hurt, may seem equally
ridiculous; but in many cases it will certainly prove most useful.
When you begin to worry, think your legs heavy. Your friends will
appreciate the relief more than you do, and will gain as you gain.

A recital of all the emotional disturbances which seem to have so
strong a hold on us, and which are merely misdirected nervous force,
might easily fill a volume; but a few of the most common troubles,
such as have been given, will perhaps suffice to help each
individual to understand his own especial temptations in that
direction,--and if I have made even partially clear the ease with
which they may be relieved through careful physical training, it is
all I can hope for.

The body must be trained to obey the mind; the mind must be trained
to give the body commands worth obeying.

The real feelings of life are too exquisite and strengthening in
their depth and power to be crowded out by those gross forms of
nervous excitement which I can find no better name for than sham
emotions. If we could only realize this more broadly, and bring up
the children with a wholesome dread of morbid feeling what a marked
change would there be in the state of the entire race!

All physicians agree that in most cases it is not overwork, it is
not mental strain, that causes the greater number of cases of
nervous disturbance, but that they are more often brought on by
emotional strain.

The deepest grief, as well as the greatest joy, can be met in a way
to give new strength and new power for use if we have a sound
philosophy and a well-guided, wholesome body to meet it. But these
last are the work of years; and neither the philosophy nor the
physical strength can be brought to bear at short notice, although
we can do much toward a better equilibrium even late in life.

Various forms of egotism, if not exactly sham emotions, are the
causes of great nervous strain. Every physician knows the intense
egotism which often comes with nervous prostration. Some one has
very aptly said that insanity is only egotism gone to seed. It often
seems so, especially when it begins with nervous prostration. We
cannot be too careful to shun this nervous over-care for self.

We inherit so strongly the subjective way of living rather than the
objective, that it impresses itself upon our very nerves; and they,
instead of being open channels for the power always at our command
to pass freely to the use for which it is intended, stop the way by
means of the attention which is so uselessly turned back on
ourselves, our narrow personal interests, and our own welfare. How
often we see cases where by means of the nervous tension all this
has increased to a disease, and the tiresome _Ego_ is a monster in
the way of its owner and all his would-be friends. "I cannot bear
this." "I shall take cold." "If you only knew how I suffered." Why
should we know, unless through knowing we can give you some relief?
And so it goes, I--I--I--forever, and the more the more nervous
prostration.

Keep still, that all which is good may come to you, and live out to
others that your life may broaden for use. In this way we can take
all that Nature is ready to give us, and will constantly give us,
and use it as hers and for her purposes, which are always the truest
and best Then we live as a little child would live,--only with more
wisdom.






X.

NATURE'S TEACHING





NATURE is not only our one guide in the matter of physical training,
she is the chief engineer who will keep us in order and control the
machine, if we aim to fulfil her conditions and shun every personal
interference with the wholesome working of her laws.

Here is where the exquisite sense of growing power comes. In
studying Nature, we not only realize the strength that comes from
following her lead, but we discover her in ourselves gently moving
us onward.

We all believe we look to Nature, if we think at all; and it is a
surprise to find how mistaken we are. The time would not be wasted
if we whose duties do not lead us to any direct study of natural
life for personal reasons, would take fifteen minutes every day
simply to think of Nature and her methods of working, and to see at
the same time where, so far as we individually are concerned, we
constantly interfere with the best use of her powers. With all
reverence I say it, this should be the first form of prayer; and our
ability to pray sincerely to God and live in accordance with His
laws would grow in proportion to our power of sincere sympathy with
the workings of those laws in Nature.

Try to realize the quiet power of all natural growth and movement,
from a blade of grass, through a tree, a forest of trees, the entire
vegetable growth on the earth, the movement of the planets, to the
growth and involuntary vital operations of our own bodies.

No words can bring so full a realization of the quiet power in the
progress of Nature as will the simple process of following the
growth of a tree in imagination from the working of its sap in the
root up to the tips of the leaves, the blossoms, and the fruit. Or
beginning lower, follow the growth of a blade of grass or a flower,
then a tree, and so on to the movement of the earth, and then of all
the planets in the universe. Let your imagination picture so vividly
all natural movements, little by little, that you seem to be really
at one with each and all. Study the orderly working of your own
bodily functions; and having this clearly in mind, notice where you,
in all movements that are or might be under the control of your
will, are disobeying Nature's laws.

Nature shows us constantly that at the back of every action there
should be a great repose. This holds good from the minutest growth
to the most powerful tornado. It should be so with us not only in
the simple daily duties, but in all things up to the most intense
activity possible to man. And this study and realization of Nature's
method which I am pleading for brings a vivid sense of our own want
of repose. The compensation is fortunately great, or the
discouragement might be more than could be borne. We must appreciate
a need to have it supplied; we must see a mistake in order to shun
it.

How can we expect repose of mind when we have not even repose of
muscle? When the most external of the machine is not at our command,
surely the spirit that animates the whole cannot find its highest
plane of action. Or how can we possibly expect to know the repose
that should be at our command for every emergency, or hope to
realize the great repose behind every action, when we have not even
learned the repose in rest?

Think of Nature's resting times, and see how painful would be the
result of a digression.

Our side of the earth never turns suddenly toward the sun at night,
giving us flashes of day in the darkness. When it is night, it is
night steadily, quietly, until the time comes for day. A tree in
winter, its time for rest, never starts out with a little bud here
and there, only to be frost bitten, and so when spring-time comes,
to result in an uneven looking, imperfectly developed tree. It rests
entirely in its time for rest; and when its time for blooming comes,
its action is full and true and perfect. The grass never pushes
itself up in little, untimely blades through the winter, thus
leaving our lawns and fields full of bare patches in the warmer
season. The flowers that close at night do not half close, folding
some petals and letting others stay wide open. Indeed, so perfectly
does Nature rest when it is her time for resting, that even the
suggestion of these abnormal actions seems absolutely ridiculous.
The less we allow ourselves to be controlled by Nature's laws, the
more we ignore their wonderful beauty; and yet there is that in us
which must constantly respond to Nature unconsciously, else how
could we at once feel the absurdity of any disobedience to her laws,
everywhere except with man? And man, who is not only free to obey,
but has exquisite and increasing power to realize and enjoy them in
all their fulness, lives so far out of harmony with these laws as
ever to be blind to his own steady disobedience.

Think of the perfect power for rest in all animals. Lift a cat when
she is quiet, and see how perfectly relaxed she is in every muscle.
That is not only the way she sleeps, but the way she rests; and no
matter how great or how rapid the activity, she drops all tension at
once when she stops. So it is with all animals, except in rare cases
where man has tampered with them in a way to interfere with the true
order of their lives.

Watch a healthy baby sleeping; lift its arm, its leg, or its head
carefully, and you will find each perfectly relaxed and free. You
can even hold it on your outspread hands, and the whole little
weight, full of life and gaining new power through the perfect rest,
will give itself entirely to your hands, without one particle of
tension. The sleep that we get in babyhood is the saving health of
many. But, alas! at a very early age useless tension begins, and
goes on increasing; and if it does not steadily lead to acute
"Americanitis," it prevents the perfect use of all our powers.
Mothers, watch your children with a care which will be all the more
effective because they will be unconscious of it; for a child's
attention should seldom be drawn to its own body. Lead them toward
the laws of Nature, that they may grow in harmony with them, and so
be saved the useless suffering, strain, and trouble that comes to us
Americans. If we do not take care, the children will more and more
inherit this fearful misuse of the nervous force, and the
inheritance will be so strong that at best we can have only little
invalids. How great the necessity seems for the effort to get back
into Nature's ways when we reflect upon the possibilities of a
continued disobedience!

To be sure, Nature has Repose itself and does not have to work for
it. Man is left free to take it or not as he chooses. But before he
is able to receive it he has personal tendencies to restlessness to
overcome. And more than that, there are the inherited nervous habits
of generations of ancestors to be recognized and shunned. But repose
is an inmost law of our being, and the quiet of Nature is at our
command much sooner than we realize, if we want it enough to work
for it steadily day by day. Nothing will increase our realization of
the need more than a little daily thought of the quiet in the
workings of Nature and the consequent appreciation of our own lack.
Ruskin tells the story with his own expressive power when he says,
"Are not the elements of ease on the face of all the greatest works
of creation? Do they not say, not there has been a great _effort
_here, but there has been a great power here?"

The greatest act, the only action which we know to be power in
itself, is the act of Creation. Behind that action there lies a
great Repose. We are part of Creation, we should be moved by its
laws. Let us shun everything we see to be in the way of our own best
power of action in muscle, nerve, senses, mind, and heart. Who knows
the new perception and strength, the increased power for use that is
open to us if we will but cease to be an obstruction?

Freedom within the limits of Nature's laws, and indeed there is no
freedom without those limits, is best studied and realized in the
growth of all plants,--in the openness of the branch of a vine to
receive the sap from the main stem, in the free circulation of the
sap in a tree and in all vegetable organisms.

Imagine the branch of a vine endowed with the power to grow
according to the laws which govern it, or to ignore and disobey
those laws. Imagine the same branch having made up its vegetable
mind that it could live its own life apart from the vine, twisting
its various fibres into all kinds of knots and snarls, according to
its own idea of living, so that the sap from the main stem could
only reach it in a minimum quantity. What a dearth of leaf, flower,
and fruit would appear in the branch! Yet the figure is perfectly
illustrative of the way in which most of us are interfering with the
best use of the life that is ours.

Freedom is obedience to law. A bridge can be built to stand, only in
obedience to the laws of mechanics. Electricity can be made a useful
power only in exact obedience to the laws that govern it, otherwise
it is most destructive. Has man the privilege of disobeying natural
laws, only in the use of his own individual powers? Clearly not. And
why is it that while recognizing and endeavoring to obey the laws of
physics, of mechanics, and all other laws of Nature in his work in
the world, he so generally defies the same laws in their application
to his own being?

The freedom of an animal's body in obeying the animal instincts is
beautiful to watch. The grace and power expressed in the freedom of
a tiger are wonderful. The freedom in the body of a baby to respond
to every motion and expression is exquisite to study. But before
most children have been in the world three years their inherited
personal contractions begin, and unless the little bodies can be
watched and trained out of each unnecessary contraction as it
appears, and so kept in their own freedom, there comes a time later,
when to live to the greatest power for use they must spend hours in
learning to be babies all over again, and then gain a new freedom
and natural movement.

The law which perhaps appeals to us most strongly when trying to
identify ourselves with Nature is the law of rhythm: action,
re-action; action, re-action; action, re-action,--and the two must
balance, so that equilibrium is always the result. There is no
similar thought that can give us keener pleasure than when we rouse
all our imagination, and realize all our power of identifying
ourselves with the workings of a great law, and follow this rhythmic
movement till we find rhythm within rhythm,--from the rhythmic
motion of the planets to the delicate vibrations of heat and light.
It is helpful to think of rhythmic growth and motion, and not to
allow the thought of a new rhythm to pass without identifying
ourselves with it as fully as our imagination will allow.

We have the rhythm of the seasons, of day and night, of the tides,
and of vegetable and animal life,--as the various rhythmic motions
in the flying of birds. The list will be endless, of course, for the
great law rules everything in Nature, and our appreciation of it
grows as we identify ourselves with its various modes of action.

One hair's variation in the rhythm of the universe would bring
destruction, and yet we little individual microcosms are knocking
ourselves into chronic states of chaos because we feel that we can
be gods, and direct our own lives so much better than the God who
made us. We are left in freedom to go according to His laws, or
against them; and we are generally so convinced that our own stupid,
short-sighted way is the best, that it is only because Nature
tenderly holds to some parts of us and keeps them in the rhythm,
that we do not hurl ourselves to pieces. _This law of rhythm--or of
equilibrium in motion and in rest--is the end, aim, and effect of
all true physical training for the development and guidance of the
body._ Its ruling power is proved in the very construction of the
body,--the two sides; the circulation of the blood, veins and
arteries; the muscles, extensor and flexor; the nerves, sensory and
motor.

When the long rest of a body balances the long activity, in day and
night; when the shorter rests balance the shorter activity, as in
the various opportunities offered through the day for entire rest,
if only a minute at a time; when the sensory and motor nerves are
clear for impression and expression; when the muscles in parts of
the body not needed are entirely quiet, allowing those needed for a
certain action to do their perfect work; when the co-ordination of
the muscles in use is so established that the force for a movement
is evenly divided; when the flexor rests while its antagonizing
muscle works, and _vice versa,--_ when all this which is merely a
_natural power for action and rest _is automatically established,
then the body is ready to obey and will obey the lightest touch of
its owner, going in whatever direction it may be sent, artistic,
scientific, or domestic. As this exquisite sense of ease in a
natural movement grows upon us, no one can describe the feeling of
new power or of positive comfort which comes with it; and yet it is
no miracle, it is only natural. The beasts have the same freedom;
but they have not the mind to put it to higher uses, or the sense to
enjoy its exquisite power.

Often it seems that the care and trouble to get back into Nature's
way is more than compensated for in the new appreciation of her laws
and their uses. But the body, after all, is merely a servant; and,
however perfect its training may have been, if the man, the master,
puts his natural power to mean or low uses, sooner or later the
power will be lost. Self-conscious pride will establish its own
contractions. The use of a natural power for evil ends will limit
itself sooner or later. The love for unwholesome surroundings will
eventually put a check on a perfectly free body, although sometimes
the wonder is that the check is so long in coming. If we have once
trained ourselves into natural ways, so akin are the laws of Nature
and spirit, both must be obeyed; and to rise to our greatest power
means always to rise to our greatest power for use. "A man's life is
God's love for the use for which he was made;" a man's power lies in
the best direction of that use. This is a truth as practical as the
necessity for walking on the feet with the head up.






XI.

THE CHILD AS AN IDEAL





WHILE the path of progress in the gaining of repose could not be
traced thus far without reference to the freedom of a baby, a fuller
consideration of what we may learn from this source must be of great
use to us.

The peace and freshness of a little baby are truly beautiful, but
are rarely appreciated. Few of us have peace enough in ourselves to
respond to these charms. It is like playing the softest melody upon
a harp to those whose ears have long been closed.

Let us halt, and watch, and listen, and see what we shall gain!

Throughout the muscular system of a normal, new-born baby it is
impossible to find any waste of force. An apparent waste will, upon
examination, prove itself otherwise. Its cry will at first seem to
cause contractions of the face; but the absolute removal of all
traces of contraction as the cry ceases, and a careful watching of
the act itself, show it to be merely an exaggeration of muscular
action, not a permanent contraction. Each muscle is balanced by an
opposing one; in fact, the whole thing is only a very even
stretching of the face, and, undoubtedly, has a purpose to
accomplish.

Examine a baby's bed, and see how distinctly it bears the impression
of an absolute giving up of weight and power. They actually _do_
that which we only theorize about, and from them we may learn it
all, if we will.

A babe in its bath gives us another fine opportunity for learning to
be simple and free. It yields to the soft pressure of the water with
a repose which is deeply expressive of gratitude; while we, in our
clumsy departures from Nature's state, often resist with such
intensity as not to know--in circumstances just as simply useful to
us--that we have anything for which to be grateful.

In each new experience we find it the same, the healthy baby yields,
_lets himself go,_ with an case which must double his chances for
comfort. Could we but learn to do so, our lives would lengthen, and
our joys and usefulness strengthen in exact proportion.

All through the age of unconsciousness, this physical freedom is
maintained even where the mental attitude is not free. Baby wrath is
as free and economical of physical force as are the winsome moods,
and this until the personality has developed to some extent,--that
is, _until the child reflects the contractions of those around him._
It expends itself in well-balanced muscular exercise, one set of
muscles resting fully in their moment of non-use, while another set
takes up the battle. At times it will seem that all wage war
together; if so, the rest is equal to the action.

It is not the purpose of this chapter to recommend anger, even of
the most approved sort; but if we will express the emotion at all,
let us do it as well as we did in our infancy!

Channels so free as this would necessitate, would lessen our
temptations to such expression; we, with mature intellects, would
see it for what it is, and the next generation of babies would less
often exercise their wonderfully balanced little bodies in such an
unlovely waste.

Note the perfect openness of a baby throat as the child coos out his
expression of happiness. Could anything be more free, more like the
song of a bird in its obedience to natural laws? Alas, for how much
must we answer that these throats are so soon contracted, the tones
changed to so high a pitch, the voice becoming so shrill and harsh!
Can we not open our throats and become as these little children?

The same _openness_ in the infant organism is the child's protection
in many dangers. Falls that would result in breaks, strains, or
sprains in us, leave the baby entirely whole save in its "feelings,"
and often there, too, if the child has been kept in the true state
mentally.

Watch a baby take its food, and contrast it with our own ways of
eating. The baby draws it in slowly and evenly, with a quiet rhythm
which is in exact accord with the rhythmic action of its digestive
organs. You feel each swallow taken in the best way for repair, and
for this reason it seems sometimes as if one could see a baby grow
while feeding. There cannot be a lovelier glimpse of innocent
physical repose than the little respites from the fatigue of feeding
which a baby often takes. His face moist, with open pores, serene
and satisfied, he views the hurry about him as an interesting phase
of harmless madness. He is entirely outside of it until
self-consciousness is quite developed.

The sleep of a little child is another opportunity for us to learn
what we need. Every muscle free, every burden dropped, each breath
carries away the waste, and fills its place with the needed
substance of increasing growth and power.

In play, we find the same freedom. When one idea is being executed,
every other is excluded. They do not think _dolls_ while they roll
_hoop!_

They do not think of work while they play. Examine and see how we do
both. The baby of one year, sitting on the shore burying his fat
hand in the soft warm sand, is for the time being alive _only_ to
its warmth and softness, with a dim consciousness of the air and
color about him. If we could engross ourselves as fully and with as
simple a pleasure, we should know far more of the possible power of
our minds for both work and rest.

It is interesting to watch normal children in these concentrations,
because from their habits we may learn so much which may improve our
own sadly different manner of living. It is also interesting but
pathetic to see the child gradually leaving them as he approaches
boyhood, and to trace our part in leading him away from the true
path.

The baby's perfect placidity, caused by mental and bodily freedom,
is disturbed at a very early age by those who should be his true
guides. It would be impossible to say when the first wrong
impression is made, but it is so early that a true statement of the
time could only be accepted from scientific men. For mothers and
fathers have often so dulled their own sensitiveness, that they are
powerless to recognize the needs of their children, and their
impressions are, in consequence, untrustworthy.

At the time the pangs of teething begin, it is the same. The healthy
child left to itself would wince occasionally at the slight pricking
pain, and then turn its entire attention elsewhere, and thus become
refreshed for the next trial. But under the adult influence the
agony of the first little prick is often magnified until the result
is a cross, tired baby, already removed several degrees from the
beautiful state of peace and freedom in which Nature placed him
under our care.

The bodily freedom of little children is the foundation of a most
beautiful mental freedom, which cannot be wholly destroyed by us.
This is plainly shown by the childlike trust which they display in
all the affairs of life, and also in their exquisite responsiveness
to the spiritual truths which are taught to them. The very
expression of face of a little child as it is led by the hand is a
lesson to us upon which pages might be written.

Had we the same spirit dwelling in us, we more often should feel
ourselves led "beside the still waters," and made "to lie down in
green pastures." We should grow faster spiritually, because we
should not make conflicts for ourselves, but should meet with the
Lord's quiet strength whatever we had to pass through.

Let us learn of these little ones, and help them to hold fast to
that which they teach us. Let us remember that the natural and the
ideal are truly one, and endeavor to reach the latter by means of
the former.

When through hereditary tendency our little child is not
ideal,--that is, natural,--let us with all the more earnestness
learn to be quiet ourselves that we may lead him to it, and thus
open the channels of health and strength.






XII.

TRAINING FOR REST





BUT how shall we gain a natural repose? It is absurd to emphasize
the need without giving the remedy. "I should be so glad to relax,
but I do not know how," is the sincere lament of many a nervously
strained being.

There is a regular training which acts upon the nervous force and
teaches its proper use, as the gymnasium develops the muscles. This,
as will be easily seen, is at first just the reverse of vigorous
exercise, and no woman should do powerful muscular work without
learning at the same time to guide her body with true economy of
force. It is appalling to watch the faces of women in a gymnasium,
to see them using five, ten, twenty times the nervous force
necessary for every exercise. The more excited they get, the more
nervous force they use; and the hollows under their eyes increase,
the strained expression comes, and then they wonder that after such
fascinating exercise they feel so tired. A common sight in gymnasium
work, especially among women, is the nervous straining of the
muscles of the arms and hands, while exercises meant for the legs
alone are taken. This same muscular tension is evident in the arm
that should be at rest while the other arm is acting; and if this
want of equilibrium in exercise is so strikingly noticeable in the
limbs themselves, how much worse it must be all through the less
prominent muscles! To guide the body in trapeze work, every
well-trained acrobat knows he must have a quiet mind, a clear head,
and obedient muscles. I recall a woman who stands high in gymnastic
work, whose agility on the triple bars is excellent, but the nervous
strain shown in the drawn lines of her face before she begins,
leaves one who studies her carefully always in doubt as to whether
she will not get confused before her difficult performance is over,
and break her neck in consequence. A realization also of the
unnecessary nervous force she is using, detracts greatly from the
pleasure in watching her performance.

If we were more generally sensitive to misdirected nervous power,
this interesting gymnast, with many others, would lose no time in
learning a more quiet and naturally economical guidance of her
muscles, and gymnasium work would not be, as Dr. Checkley very
justly calls it, "more often a straining than a training."

To aim a gun and hit the mark, a quiet control of the muscles is
necessary. If the purpose of our actions were as well defined as the
bull's eye of a target, what wonderful power in the use of our
muscles we might very soon obtain! But the precision and ease in an
average motion comes so far short of its possibility, that if the
same carelessness were taken as a matter of course in shooting
practice, the side of a barn should be an average target.

Gymnasium work for women would be grand in its wholesome influence,
if only they might learn the proper _use_ of the body while they are
working for its development. And no gymnasium will be complete and
satisfactory in its results until the leader arranges separate
classes for training in economy of force and rhythmic motion. In
order to establish a true physical balance the training of the
nerves should receive as much attention as the training of the
muscles. The more we misuse our nervous force, the worse the
expenditure will be as muscular power increases; I cannot waste so
much force on a poorly developed muscle as on one that is well
developed. This does not by any means argue against the development
of muscle; it argues for its proper use. Where is the good of an
exquisitely formed machine, if it is to be shattered for want of
control of the motive power?

It would of course be equally harmful to train the guiding power
while neglecting entirely flabby, undeveloped muscles. The only
difference is that in the motions for this training and for the
perfect co-ordinate use of the muscles, there must be a certain
amount of even, muscular development; whereas although the vigorous
exercise for the growth of the muscles often helps toward a healthy
nervous system, it more often, where the nervous force is misused,
exaggerates greatly the tension.

In every case it is equilibrium we are working for, and a one-sided
view of physical training is to be deplored and avoided, whether the
balance is lost on the side of the nerves or the muscles.

Take a little child early enough, and watch it carefully through a
course of natural rhythmic exercises, and there will be no need for
the careful training necessary to older people. But help for us who
have gone too far in this tension comes only through patient study.

So far as I can, I will give directions for gaining the true
relaxation. But because written directions are apt to be
misunderstood, and so bring discouragement and failure, I will
purposely omit all but the most simple means of help; but these I am
sure will bring very pleasant effects if followed exactly and with
the utmost patience.

The first care should be to realize how far you are from the ability
to let go of your muscles when they are not needed; how far you are
from the natural state of a cat when she is quiet, or better still
from the perfect freedom of a sleeping baby; consequently how
impossible it is for you ever to rest thoroughly. Almost all of us
are constantly exerting ourselves to hold our own heads on. This is
easily proved by our inability to let go of them. The muscles are so
well balanced that Nature holds our heads on much more perfectly
than we by any possibility can. So it is with all our muscles; and
to teach them better habits we must lie flat on our backs, and try
to give our whole weight to the floor or the bed. The floor is
better, for that does not yield in the least to us, and the bed
does. Once on the floor, give way to it as far as possible. Every
day you will become more sensitive to tension, and every day you
will be better able to drop it. While you are flat on your backs, if
you can find some one to "prove" your relaxation, so much the
better. Let your friend lift an arm, bending it at the different
joints, and then carefully lay it down. See if you can give its
weight entirely to the other person, so that it seems to be no part
of you, but as separate as if it were three bags of sand, fastened
loosely at the wrist, the elbow, and the shoulder; it will then be
full of life without tension. You will find probably, either that
you try to assist in raising the arm in your anxiety to make it
heavy, or you will resist so that it is not heavy with its own
weight but with I your personal effort. In some cases the nervous
force is so active that the arm reminds one of a lively eel.

Then have your legs treated in the same way. It is good even to have
some one throw your arm or your leg up and catch it; also to let it
go unexpectedly. Unnecessary tension is proved when the limb,
instead of dropping by the pure force of gravity, sticks fast
wherever it was left. The remark when the extended limb is brought
to the attention of its owner is, "Well, what did you want me to do?
You did not say you wanted me to drop it,"--which shows the habitual
attitude of tension so vividly as to be almost ridiculous; the very
idea being, of course, that you are not wanted to do anything but
_let go,_ when the arm would drop of its own accord. If the person
holding your arm says, "Now I will let go, and it must drop as if a
dead weight," almost invariably it will not be the force of gravity
that takes it, but your own effort to make it a dead weight; and it
will come down with a thump which shows evident muscular effort, or
so slowly and actively as to prove that you cannot let it alone.
Constant and repeated trial, with right thought from the pupil, will
be certain to bring good results, so that at least he or she can be
sure of better power for rest in the limbs. Unfortunately this first
gain will not last. Unless the work goes on, the legs and arms will
soon be "all tightened up" again, and it will seem harder to let go
than ever.

The next care must be with the head. That cannot be treated as
roughly as the limbs. It can be tossed, if the tosser will surely
catch it on his open hand. Never let it drop with its full weight on
the floor, for the jar of the fall, if you are perfectly relaxed, is
unpleasant; if you are tense, it is dangerous. At first move it
slowly up and down. As with the arms, there will be either
resistance or attempted assistance. It seems at times as though it
were and always would be impossible to let go of your own head. Of
course, if you cannot give up and let go for a friend to move it
quietly up and down, you cannot let go and give way entirely to the
restful power of sleep. The head must be moved up and down, from
side to side, and round and round in opposite ways, gently and until
its owner can let go so completely that it seems like a big ball in
the hands that move it. Of course care must be taken to move it
gently and never to extremes, and it will not do to trust an
unintelligent person to "prove" a body in any way. Ladies' maids
have been taught to do it very well, but they had in all cases to be
carefully watched at first.

The example of a woman who had for years been an invalid is
exceedingly interesting as showing how persistently people "hold
on." Although the greater part of her time had been spent in a
reclining attitude, she had not learned the very rudiments of
relaxation, and could not let go of her own muscles any more easily
than others who have always been in active life. Think of holding
yourself on to the bed for ten years! Her maid learned to move her
in the way that has been described, and after repeated practice, by
the time she had reached the last movement the patient would often
be sleeping like a baby. It did not cure her, of course; that was
not expected. But it taught her to "relax" to a pain instead of
bracing up and fighting it, and to live in a natural way so far as
an organic disease and sixty years of misused and over-used force
would allow.

Having relaxed the legs and arms and head, next the spine and all
the muscles of the chest must be helped to relax. This is more
difficult, and requires not only care but greater muscular strength
in the lifter. If the one who is lifting will only remember to press
hard on the floor with the feet, and put all the effort of lifting
in the legs, the strain will be greatly lessened.

Take hold of the hands and lift the patient or pupil to a sitting
attitude. Here, of course, if the muscles that hold the head are
perfectly relaxed, the head will drop back from its own weight.
Then, in letting the body back again, of course, keep hold of the
hands,--_never_ let go; and after it is down, if the neck has
remained relaxed, the head will be back in a most uncomfortable
attitude, and must be lifted and placed in the right position. It is
some time before relaxation is so complete as that. At first the
head and spine will come up like a ramrod, perfectly rigid and
stiff. There will be the same effort either to assist or resist; the
same disinclination to give up; often the same remark, "If you will
tell me what you want me to do, I will do it;" the same inability to
realize that the remark, and the feeling that prompts it, are
entirely opposed to the principle that you are _wanted to do
nothing, and to do nothing with an effort is impossible._ In
lowering the body it must "give" like a bag of bones fastened
loosely together and well padded. Sometimes when it is nearly down,
one arm can be dropped, and the body let down the rest of the way by
the other. Then it is simply giving way completely to the laws of
gravity, it will fall over on the side that is not held, and only
roll on its back as the other arm is dropped. Care must always be
taken to arrange the head comfortably after the body is resting on
the ground. Sometimes great help is given toward relaxing the
muscles of the chest and spine by pushing the body up as if to roll
it over, first one side and then the other, and letting it roll back
from its own weight. It is always good, after helping the separate
parts to a restful state, to take the body as a whole and roll it
over and over, carefully, and see if the owner can let you do so
without the slightest effort to assist you. It will be easily seen
that the power, once gained, of remaining perfectly passive while
another moves you, means a steadily increasing ability to relax at
all times when the body should be given to perfect rest. This power
to "let go" causes an increasing sensitiveness to all tension,
which, unpleasant as it always is to find mistakes of any kind in
ourselves, brings a very happy result in the end; for we can never
shun evils, physical or spiritual, until we have recognized them
fully, and every mistaken way of using our machine, when studiously
avoided, brings us nearer to that beautiful unconscious use of it
which makes it possible for us to forget it entirely in giving it
the more truly to its highest use.

After having been helped in some degree by another, and often
without that preliminary help, come the motions by which we are
enabled to free ourselves; and it is interesting to see how much
more easily the body will move after following this course of
exercises. Take the same attitude on the floor, giving up entirely
in every part to the force of gravity, and keep your eyes closed
through the whole process. Then stop and imagine yourself heavy.
First think one leg heavy, then the other, then each arm, and both
arms, being sure to keep the same weight in the legs; then your body
and head. Use your imagination to the full extent of its power, and
think the whole machine heavy; wonder how the floor can hold such a
weight. Begin then to take a deep breath. Inhale through the nose
quietly and easily. Let it seem as if the lungs expanded themselves
with, out voluntary effort on your part. Fill first the lower lungs
and then the upper. Let go, and exhale the air with a sense of
relief. As the air leaves your lungs, try to let your body rest back
on the floor more heavily, as a rubber bag would if the air were
allowed to escape from it. Repeat this breathing exercise several
times; then inhale and exhale rhythmically, with breaths long enough
to give about six to a minute, for ten times, increasing the number
every day until you reach fifty. This eventually will establish the
habit of longer breaths in the regular unconscious movement of our
lungs, which is most helpful to a wholesome physical state. The
directions for deep breathing should be carefully followed in the
deep breaths taken after each motion. After the deep breathing, drag
your leg up slowly, very slowly, trying to have no effort except in
the hip joint, allowing the knee to bend, and dragging the heel
heavily along the floor, until it is up so far that the sole of the
foot touches without effort on your part. Stop occasionally in the
motion and let the weight come into the heel, then drag the foot
with less effort than before,--so will the strain of movement be
steadily decreased. Let the leg slip slowly down, and when it is
nearly flat on the floor again, let go, so that it gives entirely
and drops from its own weight. If it is perfectly free, there is a
pleasant little spring from the impetus of dropping, which is more
or less according to the healthful state of the body. The same
motion must be repeated with the other leg. Every movement should be
slower each day. It is well to repeat the movements of the legs for
three times, trying each time to move more slowly, with the leg
heavier than the time before. After this, lift the arm slowly from
the shoulder, letting the hand hang over until it is perpendicular
to the floor. Be careful to think the arm heavy, and the motive
power in the shoulder. It helps to relax if you imagine your arm
held to the shoulder by a single hair, and that if you move it with
a force beyond the minimum needed to raise it, it will drop off
entirely. To those who have little or no imagination this will seem
ridiculous; to others who have more, and can direct it usefully,
this and similar ways will be very helpful. After the arm is raised
to a perpendicular position, let the force of gravity have
it,--first the upper arm to the elbow, and then the forearm and
hand, so that it falls by pieces. Follow the same motion with the
other arm, and repeat this three times, trying to improve with each
repetition.

Next, the head must be moved slowly,--so slowly that it seems as
though it hardly moved at all,--first rolled to the left, then back
and to the right and back again; and this also can be repeated three
times. After each of the above motions there should be two or three
long, quiet breaths. To free the spine, sit up on the floor, and
with heavy arms and legs, head dropped forward, let it go back
slowly and easily, as if the vertebrae were beads on a string, and
first one bead lay flat, then another and another, until the whole
string rests on the floor, and the head falls back with its own
weight. This should be practised over and over before the movement
can be perfectly free; and it is well to begin on the bed, until you
catch the idea and its true application. After, and sometimes
before, the process of slow motions, rolling over loosely on one
side should be practised,--remaining there until the weight all
seems near the floor, and then giving way so that the force of
gravity seems to "flop" it back (I use "flop" advisedly); so again
resting on the other side. But one must go over by regular motions,
raising the leg first heavily and letting it fall with its full
weight over the other leg, so that the ankles are crossed. The arm
on the same side must be raised as high as possible and dropped over
the chest. Then the body can be rolled over, and carried as it were
by the weight of the arm and leg. It must go over heavily and freely
like a bag of loose bones, and it helps greatly to freedom to roll
over and over in this way.

Long breaths, taken deeply and quietly, should be interspersed all
through these exercises for extreme relaxation. They prevent the
possibility of relaxing too far. And as there is a pressure on every
muscle of the body during a deep inspiration, the muscles, being now
relaxed into freedom, are held in place, so to speak, by the
pressure from the breath,--as we blow in the fingers of a glove to
put them in shape.

Remember always that it is equilibrium we are working for, and this
extreme relaxation will bring it, because we have erred so far in
the opposite direction. For instance, there is now no balance at all
between our action and our rest, because we are more or less tense
and consequently active all through the times when we should be
entirely at rest; and we never can be moved by Nature's rhythm until
we learn absolute relaxation for rest, and so gain the true
equilibrium in that way. Then again, since we use so much
unnecessary tension in everything we do, although we cannot remove
it entirely until we learn the normal motion of our muscles, still
after an hour's practice and the consequent gain in extreme
relaxation, it will be impossible to attack our work with the same
amount of unnecessary force, at least for a time; and every day the
time in which we are able to work, or talk, or move with less
tension will increase, and so our bad habits be gradually changed,
if not to good, to better ones. So the true equilibrium comes
gradually more and more into every action of our lives, and we feel
more and more the wholesome harmony of a rhythmic life. We gradually
swing into rhythm with Nature through a child-like obedience to her
laws.

Of one thing I must warn all nervous people who mean to try the
relief to be gained from relaxation. The first effects will often be
exceedingly unpleasant. The same results are apt to follow that come
from the reaction after extreme excitement,--all the way from
nervous nausea and giddiness to absolute fainting. This, as must be
clearly seen, is a natural result from the relaxation that comes
after years of habitual tension. The nerves have been held in a
chronic state of excitement over something or nothing; and, of
course, when their owner for the first time lets go, they begin to
feel their real state, and the result of habitual strain must be
unpleasant. The greater the nervous strain at the beginning, the
more slowly the pupil should advance, practising in some cases only
five minutes a day.

And with regard to those people who "live on their nerves," not a
few, indeed very many, are so far out of the normal way of living
that they detest relaxation. A hearty hatred of the relaxing motions
is often met, and even when the mind is convinced of the truth of
the theory, it is only with difficulty that such people can persuade
themselves or be persuaded by others to work steadily at the
practice until the desired result is gained.

"It makes me ten times more nervous than I was before."

"Oh, no, it does not; it only makes you realize your nervousness ten
times more."

"Well, then, I do not care to realize my nervousness, it is very
disagreeable."

"But, unfortunately, if you do not realize it now and relax into
Nature's ways, she will knock you hard against one of her stone
walls, and you will rebound with a more unpleasant realization of
nervousness than is possible now."

The locomotive engine only utilizes nineteen per cent of the amount
of fuel it burns, and inventors are hard at work in all directions
to make an engine that will burn only the fuel needed to run it.
Here is a much more valuable machine--the human engine--burning
perhaps eighty-one per cent more than is needed to accomplish its
ends, not through the mistake of its Divine Maker, but through the
stupid, short-sighted thoughtlessness of the engineer.

Is not the economy of our vital forces of much greater importance
than mechanical or business economy?

It is painful to see a man--thin and pale from the excessive nervous
force he has used, and from a whole series of attacks of nervous
prostration--speak with contempt of "this method of relaxation." It
is not a method in any sense except that in which all the laws of
Nature are methods. No one invented it, no one planned it; every one
can see, who will look, that it is Nature's way and the only true
way of living. To call it a new idea or method is as absurd as it
would be, had we carried our tension so far as to forget sleep
entirely, for some one to come with a "new method" of sleep to bring
us into a normal state again; and then the people suffering most
intensely from want of "tired Nature's sweet restorer" would be the
most scornful in their irritation at this new idea of "sleep."

Again, there are many, especially women, who insist that they prefer
the nervously excited state, and would not lose it. This is like a
man's preferring to be chronically drunk. But all these abnormal
states are to be expected in abnormal people, and must be quietly
met by Nature's principles in order to lead the sufferers back to
Nature's ways. Our minds are far enough beyond our bodies to lead us
to help ourselves out of mistaken opinions; although often the
sincere help of others takes us more rapidly over hard ground and
prevents many a stumble.

Great nervous excitement is possible, every one knows, without
muscular tension; therefore in all these motions for gaining freedom
and a better physical equilibrium in nerve and muscle, the warning
cannot be given too often to take every exercise easily. Do not work
at it, go so far even as not to care especially whether you do it
right or not, but simply do what is to be done without straining
mind or body by effort. It is quite possible to make so desperate an
effort to relax, that more harm than good is done. Particularly
harmful is the intensity with which an effort to gain physical
freedom is made by so many highly strung natures. The additional
mental excitement is quite out of proportion to the gain that may
come from muscular freedom. For this reason it is never advisable
for one who feels the need of gaining a more natural control of
nervous power to undertake the training without a teacher. If a
teacher is out of the question, ten minutes practice a day is all
that should be tried for several weeks.






XIII.

TRAINING FOR MOTION





"IN every new movement, in every unknown attitude needed in
difficult exercises, the nerve centres have to exercise a kind of
selection of the muscles, bringing into action those which favor the
movement, and suppressing those which oppose it." This very evident
truth Dr. Lagrange gives us in his valuable book on the Physiology
of Exercise. At first, every new movement is unknown; and, owing to
inherited and personal contractions, almost from the earliest
movement in a child's learning to walk to the most complicated
action of our daily lives, the nerve centres exercise a mistaken
selection of muscles,--not only selecting more muscles than are
needed for perfect co-ordination of movement, but throwing more
force than necessary into the muscles selected. To a gradually
increasing extent, the contracting force, instead of being withdrawn
when the muscle is inactive, remains; and, as we have already seen,
an arm or leg that should be passive is lifted, and the muscles are
found to be contracted as if for severe action. To the surprise of
the owner the contraction cannot be at once removed. Help for this
habitual contraction is given in the preceding chapter. Further on
Dr. Lagrange tells us that "Besides the apprenticeship of movements
which are unknown, there is the improvement of already known
movements." When the work of mistaken selection of muscles has gone
on for years, the "improvement of already known movements," from the
simplest domestic action to the accomplishment of very great
purposes, is a study in itself. One must learn first to be a grown
baby, and, as we have already seen, gain the exquisite passiveness
of a baby; then one must learn to walk and to move by a natural
process of selection, which, thanks to the contractions of his
various ancestors, was not the process used for his original
movements. This learning to live all over again is neither so
frightful nor so difficult as it sounds. Having gained the passive
state described in the last chapter, one is vastly more sensitive to
unnecessary tension; and it seems often as though the child in us
asserted itself, rising with alacrity to claim its right of natural
movement, and with a new sense of freedom in the power gained to
shun inherited and personal contractions. Certainly it is a fact
that freedom of movement is gained through shunning the
contractions. And this should always be kept in mind to avoid the
self-consciousness and harm which come from a studied movement, not
to mention the very disagreeable impression such movements give to
all who appreciate their artificiality.

Motion in the human body, as well as music, is an art. An artist has
very aptly said that we should so move that if every muscle struck a
note, only harmony would result. Were it so the harmony would be
most exquisite, for the instrument is Nature's own. We see how far
we are from a realization of natural movement when we watch
carefully and note the muscular discords evident to our eyes at all
times. Even the average ballet dancing, which is supposed to be the
perfection of artistic movement, is merely a series of pirouettes
and gymnastic contortions, with the theatrical smile of a pretty
woman to throw the glare of a calcium light over the imperfections
and dazzle us. The average ballet girl is not adequately trained,
from the natural and artistic standpoint. If this is the case in
what should be the quintessence of natural, and so of artistic
movement, it is to a great degree owing to the absolute carelessness
in the selection of the muscles to be used in every movement of
daily life.

Many exercises which lead to the freedom of the body are well known
in the letter--not in the spirit--through the so-called "Delsarte
system." if they had been followed with a broad appreciation of what
they were meant for and what they could lead to, before now students
would have realized to a far greater extent what power is possible
to the human body. But so much that is good and helpful in the
"Delsarte system" has been misused, and so much of what is
thoroughly artificial and unhealthy has been mixed with the useful,
that one hesitates now to mention Delsarte. Either he was a
wonderful genius whose thoughts and discoveries have been sadly
perverted, or the inconsistencies of his teachings were great enough
to limit the true power which certainly can be found in much that he
has left us.

Besides the exercises already described there are many others,
suited to individual needs, for gaining the freedom of each part of
the body and of the body as a whole.

It is not possible to describe them clearly enough to allow them to
be followed without a teacher, and to secure the desired result.
Indeed, there would be danger of unpleasant results from
misunderstanding. The object is so to stand that our muscles hold
us, with the natural balance given them, instead of trying, as most
of us do, to hold our muscles. In moving to gain this natural
equilibrium we allow our muscles to carry us forward, and when they
have contracted as far as is possible for one set, the antagonizing
muscles carry us back. So it is with the side-to-side poising from
the ankles, and the circular motion, which is a natural swinging of
the muscles to find their centre of equilibrium, having once been
started out of it. To stand for a moment and _think_ the feet heavy
is a great help in gaining the natural poising motions, but care
should always be taken to hold the chest well up. Indeed, we need
have no sense of effort in standing, except in raising the
chest,--and that must be as if it were pulled up outside by a button
in its centre, but there must be no strain in the effort.

The result of the exercises taken to free the head is shown in the
power to toss the head lightly and easily, with the waist muscles,
from a dropped forward to an erect position. The head shows its
freedom then by the gentle swing of the neck muscles, which is
entirely involuntary and comes from the impetus given them in
tossing the head.

Tension in the muscles of the neck is often very difficult to
overcome; because, among other reasons, the sensations coming from
certain forms of nervous over-strain are very commonly referred to
the region of the base of the brain. It is not unusual to find the
back of the neck rigid in extreme tension, and whether the strain is
very severe or not, great care must be taken to free it by slow
degrees, and the motions should at first be practised only a few
minutes at a time. I can hardly warn readers too often against the
possibility of an unpleasant reaction, if the relaxing is practised
too long, or gained too rapidly.

Then should come exercises for freeing the arms; and these can be
taken sitting. Let the arms hang heavily at the sides; raise one arm
slowly, feeling the weight more and more distinctly, and only
contracting the shoulder muscles. It is well to raise it a few
inches, then drop it heavily and try again,--each time taking force
out of the lower muscles by thinking the arm heavy, and the motive
power in the shoulder. If the arm itself can rest heavily on some
one's hand while you are still raising it from the shoulder, that
proves that you have succeeded in withdrawing the useless tension.
Most arms feel stiff all the way along, when the owners raise them.
Your arm must be raised until high overhead, the hand hanging from
the wrist and dropped into your lap or down at the side, letting the
elbow "give," so that the upper arm drops first, and then the fore
arm and hand,--like three heavy sand-bags sewed together. The arm
can be brought up to the level of the shoulder, and then round in
front and dropped. To prove its freedom, toss it with the shoulder
muscles from the side into the lap. Watch carefully that the arm
itself has no more tension than if it were a sand-bag hung at the
side, and could only be moved by the shoulder. After practising this
two or three times so that the arms are relaxed enough to make you
more sensitive to tension, one hundred times a day you will find
your arms held rigidly, while you are listening or talking or
walking. Every day you will grow more sensitive to the useless
tension, and every day gain new power to drop it. This is wherein
the real practice comes. An hour or two hours a day of relaxing
exercises will amount to nothing if at the same time we are not
careful to use the freedom gained, and to do everything more
naturally. It is often said, "But I cannot waste time watching all
day to see if I am using too much force." There is no need to watch;
having once started in the right direction, if you drop useless
muscular contraction every time you notice it, that is enough. It
will be as natural to do that as for a musician to correct a discord
which he has inadvertently made on the piano.

There are no motions so quieting, so helpful in the general freeing
of the body, as the motions of the spine. There are no motions more
difficult to describe, or which should be more carefully directed.
The habitual rigidity of the spine, as compared with its possible
freedom, is more noticeable in training, of course, than is that of
any other part of the body. Each vertebra should be so distinctly
independent of every other, as to make the spine as smoothly jointed
as the toy snakes, which, when we hold the tip of the tail in our
fingers, curve in all directions. Most of us have spinal columns
that more or less resemble ramrods. It is a surprise and delight to
find what can be accomplished, when the muscles of the spine and
back are free and under control. Of course the natural state of the
spine, as the seat of a great nervous centre, affects many muscles
of the body, and, on the other hand, the freedom of these muscles
reacts favorably upon the spine.

The legs are freed for standing and walking by shaking the foot free
from the ankle with the leg, swinging the fore leg from the upper
leg, and so freeing the muscles at the knee, and by standing on a
footstool and letting one leg hang off the stool a dead weight while
swinging it round from the hip. Greater freedom and ease of movement
can be gained by standing on the floor and swinging the leg from the
hip as high as possible. Be sure that the only effort for motion is
in the muscles of the hip. There are innumerable other motions to
free the legs, and often a great variety must be practised before
the freedom can be gained.

The muscles of the chest and waist are freed through a series of
motions, the result of which is shown in the ability to toss the
body lightly from the hips, as the head is tossed from the waist
muscles; and there follows the same gentle involuntary swing of the
muscles of the waist which surprises one so pleasantly in the neck
muscles after tossing the head, and gives a new realization of what
physical freedom is.

In tossing the body the motion must be successive, like running the
scale with the vertebrae.

In no motion should the muscles work _en masse._ The more perfect
the co-ordination of muscles in any movement, the more truly each
muscle holds its own individuality. This power of freedom in motion
should be worked for after once approaching the natural equilibrium.
If you rest on your left leg, it pushes your left hip a little
farther out, which causes your body to swerve slightly to the
right,--and, to keep the balance true, the head again tips to the
left a little. Now rise slowly and freely from that to standing on
both feet, with body and head erect; then drop on the right foot
with the body to left, and head to right. Here again, as in the
motions with the spine, there is a great difference in the way they
are practised. Their main object is to help the muscles to an
independent individual co-ordination, and there should be a new
sense of ease and freedom every time we practise it. Hold the chest
up, and push yourself erect with the ball of your free foot. The
more the weight is thought into the feet the freer the muscles are
for action, provided the chest is well raised. The forward and back
spinal motion should be taken standing also; and there is a gentle
circular motion of the entire body which proves the freedom of all
the muscles for natural movement, and is most restful in its result.

The study for free movement in the arms and legs should of course be
separate. The law that every part moves from something prior to it,
is illustrated exquisitely in the motion of the fingers from the
wrist. Here also the individuality of the muscles in their perfect
co-ordination is pleasantly illustrated. To gain ease of movement in
the fore arm, its motive power must seem to be in the upper arm; the
motive power for the entire arm must seem to be centred in the
shoulder. When through various exercises a natural co-ordination of
the muscles is gained, the arm can be moved in curves from the
shoulder, which remind one of a graceful snake; and the balance is
so true that the motion seems hardly more than a thought in the
amount of effort it takes. Great care should be given to freeing the
hands and fingers. Because the hand is in such constant
communication with the brain, the tension of the entire body often
seems to be reflected there. Sometimes it is even necessary to train
the hand to some extent in the earliest lessons.

Exercises for movement in the legs are to free the joints, so that
motions may follow one another as in the arm,--the foot from the
ankle; the lower leg from the upper leg; the upper leg from the hip;
and, as--in the arm, the free action of the joints in the leg comes
as we seem to centre the motive power in the hip. There is then the
same grace and ease of movement which we gain in the arm, simply
because the muscles have their natural equilibrium.

Thus the motive power of the body will seem to be gradually drawn to
an imaginary centre in the lower part of the trunk,--which simply
means withdrawing superfluous tension from every part. The exercise
to help establish this equilibrium is graceful, and not difficult if
we take it quietly and easily, using the mind to hold a balance
without effort. Raise the right arm diagonally forward, the left leg
diagonally back,--the arm must be high up, the foot just off the
floor, so that as far as possible you make a direct line from the
wrist to the ankle; in this attitude stretch all muscles across the
body from left to right slowly and steadily, then relax quite as
slowly. Now, be sure your arm and leg are free from all tension, and
swing them very slowly, as if they were one piece, to as nearly a
horizontal position as they can reach; then slowly pivot round until
you bring your arm diagonally back and your leg diagonally forward;
still horizontal, pivot again to the starting point; then bring leg
down and arm up, always keeping them as in a line, until your foot
is again off the floor; then slowly lower your arm and let your foot
rest on the floor so that gradually your whole weight rests on that
leg, and the other is free to swing up and pivot with the opposite
arm. All this must be done slowly and without strain of any kind.
The motions which follow in sets are for the better daily working of
the body, as well as to establish its freedom. The first set is
called the "Big Rhythms," because it takes mainly the rhythmic
movement of the larger muscles of the body, and is meant, through
movements taken on one foot, to give a true balance in the poise of
the body as well as to make habitual the natural co-ordination in
the action of all the larger muscles. It is like practising a series
of big musical chords to accustom our ears to their harmonies. The
second set, named the "Little Rhythms,"--because that is a
convenient way of designating it,--is a series meant to include the
movement of all the smaller muscles as well as the large ones, and
is carried out even to the fingers. The third set is for spring and
rapid motion, especially in joints of arms and legs.

Of course having once found the body's natural freedom, the variety
of motions is as great as the variety of musical sounds and
combinations possible to an instrument which will respond to every
tone in the musical scale. It is in opening the way for this natural
motion that the exquisite possibilities in motion purely artistic
dawn upon us with ever-increasing light. And as in music it is the
sonata, the waltz, or the nocturne we must feel, not the mechanical
process of our own performance,--so in moving, it is the beautiful,
natural harmonies of the muscles, from the big rhythms to all the
smaller ones, that we must feel and make others feel, and not the
mere mechanical grace of our bodies; and we can move a sonata from
the first to the last, changing the time and holding the theme so
that the soul will be touched through the eye, as it is through the
ear now in music. But, according to the present state of the human
body, more than one generation will pass before we reach, or know
the beginning of, the highest artistic power of motion. If art is
Nature illuminated, one must have some slight appreciation and
experience of Nature before attempting her illumination.

The set of motions mentioned can be only very inadequately described
in print. But although they are graceful, because they are natural,
the first idea in practising them is that they are a means to an
end, not an end in themselves. For in the big and little rhythms and
the springing motions, in practising them over and over again we are
establishing the habit of natural motion, and will carry it more and
more into everything we do.

If the work of the brain in muscular exercise were reduced to its
minimum, the consequent benefit from all exercise would greatly
increase.

A new movement can be learned with facility in proportion to the
power for dropping at the time all impressions of previous
movements. In training to take every motion easily, after a time the
brain-work is relieved, for we move with ease,--that is, with a
natural co-ordination of muscles, automatically,--in every known
motion; and we lessen very greatly the mental strain, in learning a
new movement, by gaining the power to relax entirely at first, and
then, out of a free body, choose the muscles needed, and so avoid
the nervous strain of useless muscular experiment.

So far as the mere muscular movement goes, the sensation is that of
being well oiled. As for instance, in a natural walk, where the
swinging muscles and the standing muscles act and rest in alternate
rhythmic action, the chest is held high, the side muscles free to
move in, harmony with the legs, and all the spring in the body
brought into play through inclining slightly forward and pushing
with the ball of the back foot, the arms swinging naturally without
tension. Walking with a free body is often one of the best forms of
rest, and in the varying forms of motion arranged for practice we
are enabled to realize, that "perfect harmony of action in the
entire man invigorates every part."






XIV.

MIND TRAINING





IT will be plainly seen that this training of the body is at the
same time a training of the mind, and indeed it is in essence a
training of the will. For as we think of it carefully and analyze it
to its fundamental principles, we realize that it might almost be
summed up as in itself a training of the will alone. That is
certainly what it leads to, and where it leads from.

Maudsley tells us that "he who is incapable of guiding his muscles,
is incapable of concentrating his mind;" and it would seem to
follow, by a natural sequence, that training for the best use of all
the powers given us should begin with the muscles, and continue
through the nerves and the senses to the mind,--all by means of the
will, which should gradually remove all personal contractions and
obstructions to the wholesome working of the law of cause and
effect.

Help a child to use his own ability of gaining free muscles, nerves
clear to take impressions through every sense, a mind open to
recognize them, and a will alive with interest in and love for
finding the best in each new sensation or truth, and what can he not
reach in power of use to others and in his own growth.

The consistency of creation is perfect. The law that applies to the
guidance of the muscles works just as truly in training the senses
and the mind.

A new movement can be learned with facility in proportion to the
power of dropping at the time all impressions of previous movements.
Quickness and keenness of sense are gained only in proportion to the
power of quieting the senses not in use, and erasing previous
impressions upon the sense which is active at the time.

True concentration of mind means the ability to drop every subject
but that centred upon. Tell one man to concentrate his mind on a
difficult problem until he has worked it out,--he will clinch his
fists, tighten his throat, hold his teeth hard together, and
contract nobody knows how many more muscles in his body, burning and
wasting fuel in a hundred or more places where it should be saved.
This is _not_ concentration. Concentration means the focussing of a
force; and when the mathematical faculty of the brain alone should
be at work, the force is not focussed if it is at the same time
flying over all other parts of the body in useless strain of
innumerable muscles. Tell another man, one who works naturally, to
solve the same problem,--he will instinctively and at once "erase
all previous impressions" in muscle and nerve, and with a quiet,
earnest expression, not a face knotted with useless strain, will
concentrate upon his work. The result, so far as the problem itself
is concerned, may be the same in both cases; but the result upon the
physique of the men who have undertaken the work will be vastly
different.

It will be insisted upon by many, and, strange as it may seem, by
many who have a large share of good sense, that they can work better
with this extra tension. "For," the explanation is, "it is natural
to me." That may be, but it is not natural to Nature; and however
difficult it may be at first to drop our own way and adopt Nature's,
the proportionate gain is very great in the end.

Normal exercise often stimulates the brain, and by promoting more
vigorous circulation, and so greater physical activity all over the
body, helps the brain to work more easily. Therefore some men can
think better while walking.

This is quite unlike the superfluous strain of nervous motion,
which, however it may seem to help at the time, eventually and
steadily lessens mental power instead of increasing it. The
distinction between motion which wholesomely increases the brain
activity and that which is simply unnecessary tension, is not
difficult to discern when our eyes are well opened to superfluous
effort. This misdirected force seems to be the secret of much of the
overwork in schools, and the consequent physical break-down of
school children, especially girls. It is not that they have too much
to do, it is that they do not know how to study naturally, and with
the real concentration which learns the lesson most quickly, most
surely, and with the least amount of effort. They study a lesson
with all the muscles of the body when only the brain is needed, with
a running accompaniment of worry for fear it will not be learned.

Girls can be, have been, trained out of worrying about their
lessons. Nervous strain is often extreme in students, from
lesson-worry alone; and indeed in many cases it is the worry that
tires and brings illness, and not the study. Worry is brain tension.
It is partly a vague, unformed sense that work is not being done in
the best way which makes the pressure more than it need be; and
instead of quietly studying to work to better advantage, the worrier
allows herself to get more and more oppressed by her anxieties,--as
we have seen a child grow cross over a snarl of twine which, with
very little patience, might be easily unravelled, but in which, in
the child's nervous annoyance, every knot is pulled tighter. Perhaps
we ought hardly to expect as much from the worried student as from
the child, because the ideas of how to study arc so vague that they
seldom bring a realization of the fact that there might be an
improvement in the way of studying.

This possible improvement may be easily shown. I have taken a girl
inclined to the mistaken way of working, asked her to lie on the
floor where she could give up entirely to the force of
gravity,--then after helping her to a certain amount of passivity,
so that at least she looked quiet, have asked her to give me a list
of her lessons. Before opening her mouth to answer, she moved in
little nervous twitches, apparently every muscle in her body, from
head to foot. I stopped her, took time to bring her again to a quiet
state, and then repeated the question. Again the nervous movement
began, but this time the child exclaimed, "Why, isn't it funny? I
cannot think without moving all over!" Here was the Rubicon crossed.
She had become alive to her own superfluous tension; and after that
to train her not only to think without moving all over, but to
answer questions easily and quietly and so with more expression, and
then to study with greatly decreased effort, was a very pleasant
process.

Every boy and girl should have this training to a greater or less
degree. It is a steady, regular process, and should be so taken. We
have come through too many generations of misused force to get back
into a natural use of our powers in any rapid way; it must come step
by step, as a man is trained to use a complicated machine. It seems
hardly fair to compare such training to the use of a machine,--it
opens to us such extensive and unlimited power. We can only make the
comparison with regard to the first process of development.

A training for concentration of mind should begin with the muscles.
First, learn to withdraw the will from the muscles entirely. Learn,
next, to direct the will over the muscles of one arm while the rest
of the body is perfectly free and relaxed,--first, by stretching the
arm slowly and steadily, and then allowing it to relax; next, by
clinching the fist and drawing the arm up with all the force
possible until the elbow is entirely bent. There is not one person
in ten, hardly one in a hundred, who can command his muscles to that
slight extent. At first some one must lift the arm that should be
free, and drop it several times while the muscles of the other arm
are contracting; that will make the unnecessary tension evident.
There are also ways by which the free arm can be tested without the
help of a second person.

The power of directing the will over various muscles that should be
independent, without the so-called sympathetic contraction of other
muscles, should be gained all over the body. This is the beginning
of concentration in a true sense of the word. The necessity for
returning to an absolute freedom of body before directing the will
to any new part cannot be too often impressed upon the mind. Having
once "sensed" a free body--so to speak--we are not masters until we
gain the power to return to it at a moment's notice. In a second we
can "erase previous impressions" for the time; and that is the
foundation, the rock, upon which our house is built.

Then follows the process of learning to think and to speak in
freedom. First, as to useless muscular contractions. Watch children
work their hands when reciting in class. Tell them to stop, and the
poor things will, with great effort, hold their hands rigidly still,
and suffer from the discomfort and strain of doing so. Help them to
freedom of body, then to the sense that the working of their hands
is not really needed, and they will learn to recite with a feeling
of freedom which is better than they can understand. Sometimes a
child must be put on the floor to learn to think quietly and
directly, and to follow the same directions in this manner of
answering. It would be better if this could always be done with
thoughtful care and watching; but as this would be inappropriate
with large classes, there are quieting and relaxing exercises to be
practised sitting and standing, which will bring children to a
normal freedom, and help them to drop muscular contractions which
interfere with ease and control of thought and expression. Pictures
can be described,--scenes from Shakespeare, for instance,--in the
child's own words, while making quiet motions. Such exercise
increases the sensitiveness to muscular contraction, and unnecessary
muscular contraction, beside something to avoid in itself, obviously
makes thought _indirect._ A child must think quietly, to express his
thought quietly and directly. This exercise, of course, also
cultivates the imagination.

In all this work, as clear channels are opened for impression and
expression, the faculties themselves naturally have a freer growth.
The process of quiet thought and expression must be trained in all
phases,--from the slow description of something seen or imagined or
remembered, to the quick and correct answer required to an example
in mental arithmetic, or any other rapid thinking. This, of course,
means a growth in power of attention,--attention which is real
concentration, not the strained attention habitual to most of us,
and which being abnormal in itself causes abnormal reaction. And
this natural attention is learned in the use of each separate
sense,--to see, to hear, to taste, to smell, to touch with quick and
exact impression and immediate expression, if required, and a in
obedience to the natural law of the conservation of human energy.

With the power of studying freely, comes that of dropping a lesson
when it is once well learned, and finding it ready when needed for
recitation or for any other use. The temptation to take our work
into our play is very great, and often cannot be overcome until we
have learned how to "erase all previous impressions." The
concentration which enables us all through life to be intent upon
the one thing we are doing, whether it is tennis or trigonometry,
and drop what we have in hand at once and entirely at the right
time, free to give out attention fully to the next duty or pleasure,
is our saving health in mind and body. The trouble is we are afraid.
We have no trust. A child is afraid to stop thinking of a lesson
after it is learned,--afraid he will forget it. When he has once
been persuaded to drop it, the surprise when he takes it up again,
to find it more clearly impressed upon his mind, is delightful. One
must trust to the digestion of a lesson, as to that of a good
wholesome dinner. Worry and anxiety interfere with the one as much
as with the other. If you can drop a muscle when you have ceased
using it, that leads to the power of dropping a subject in mind; as
the muscle is fresher for use when you need it, so the subject seems
to have grown in you, and your grasp seems to be stronger when you
recur to it.

The law of rhythm must be carefully followed in this training for
the use of the mind. Do not study too long at a time. It makes a
natural reaction impossible. Arrange the work so that lessons as far
unlike as possible may be studied in immediate succession. We help
to the healthy reaction of one faculty, by exercising another that
is quite different.

This principle should be inculcated in classes, and for that purpose
a regular programme of class work should be followed, calculated to
bring about the best results in all branches of study.

The first care should be to gain quiet, as through repose of mind
and body we cultivate the power to "erase all previous impressions."
In class, quiet, rhythmic breathing, with closed eyes, is most
helpful for a beginning. The eyes must be closed and opened slowly
and gently, not snapped together or apart; and fifty breaths, a
little longer than they would naturally be, are enough to quiet a
class. The breaths must be counted, to keep the mind from wandering,
and the faces must be watched very carefully, for the expression
often shows anything but quiet. For this reason it is necessary, in
initiating a class, to begin with simple relaxing motions; later
these motions will follow the breathing. Then follow exercises for
directing the muscles. The force is directed into one arm with the
rest of the body free, and so in various simple exercises the power
of directing the will only to the muscles needed is cultivated.
After the muscle-work, the pupils are asked to centre their minds
for a minute on one subject,--the subject to be chosen by some
member, with slight help to lead the choice to something that will
be suggestive for a minute's thinking. At first it seems impossible
to hold one subject in mind for a minute; but the power grows
rapidly as we learn the natural way of concentrating, and instead of
trying to hold on to our subject, allow the subject to hold us by
refusing entrance to every other thought. In the latter case one
suggestion follows another with an ease and pleasantness which
reminds one of walking through new paths and seeing on every side
something fresh and unexpected. Then the class is asked to think of
a list of flowers, trees, countries, authors, painters, or whatever
may be suggested, and see who can think of the greatest number in
one minute. At first, the mind will trip and creak and hesitate over
the work, but with practice the list comes steadily and easily. Then
follow exercises for quickness and exactness of sight, then for
hearing, and finally for the memory. All through this process, by
constant help and suggestion, the pupils are brought to the natural
concentration. With regard to the memory, especial care should be
taken, for the harm done by a mechanical training of the memory can
hardly be computed. Repose and the consequent freedom of body and
mind lead to an opening of all the faculties for better use; if that
is so, a teacher must be more than ever alive to lead pupils to the
spirit of all they are to learn, and make the letter in every sense
suggestive of the spirit. First, care should be taken to give
something worth memorizing; secondly, ideas must be memorized before
the words. A word is a symbol, and in so far as we have the habit of
regarding it as such, will each word we hear be more and more
suggestive to us. With this habit well cultivated, one sees more in
a single glance at a poem than many could see in several readings.
Yet the reader who sees the most may be unable to repeat the poem
word for word. In cultivating the memory, the training should be
first for the attention, then for the imagination and the power of
suggestive thought; and from the opening of these faculties a true
memory will grow. The mechanical power of repeating after once
hearing so many words is a thing in itself to be dreaded. Let the
pupil first see in mind a series of pictures as the poem or page is
read, then describe them in his own words, and if the words of the
author are well worth remembering the pupil should be led to them
from the ideas. In the same way a series of interesting or helpful
thoughts can be learned.

Avoidance of mere mechanism cannot be too strongly insisted upon;
for exercise for attaining a wholesome, natural guidance of mind and
body cannot be successful unless it rouses in the mind an
appreciation of the laws of Nature which we are bound to obey. A
conscious experience of the results of such obedience is essential
to growth.






XV.

ARTISTIC CONSIDERATIONS





ALTHOUGH so much time and care are given to the various means of
artistic expression, it is a singular fact that comparatively little
attention is given to the use of the very first instrument which
should be under command before any secondary instrument can be made
perfectly expressive.

An old artist who thanked his friend for admiring his pictures
added: "If you could only see the pictures in my brain. But--"
pointing to his brain and then to the ends of his fingers--"the
channels from here to here are so long!" The very sad tone which we
can hear in the wail of the painter expresses strongly the
deficiencies of our age in all its artistic efforts. The channels
are shorter just in proportion to their openness. If the way from
the brain to the ends of the fingers is perfectly clear, the brain
can guide the ends of the fingers to carry out truly its own
aspirations, and the honest expression of the brain will lead always
to higher ideals. But the channels cannot be free, and the artist
will be bound so long as there is superfluous tension in any part of
the body. So absolutely necessary, is it for the best artistic
expression that the body should throughout be only a servant of the
mind, that the more we think of it the more singular it seems that
the training of the body to a childlike state is not regarded as
essential, and taken as a matter of course, even as we take our
regular nourishment.

The artificial is tension in its many trying and disagreeable
phases. Art is freedom, equilibrium, rhythm,--anything and
everything that means wholesome life and growth toward all that is
really the good, the true, and the beautiful.

Art is immeasurably greater than we are. If we are free and quiet,
the poem, the music, the picture will carry us, so that we shall be
surprised at our own expression; and when we have finished, instead
of being personally elated with conceited delight in what we have
done, or exhausted with the superfluous effort used, we shall feel
as if a strong wind had blown through us and cleared us for better
work in the future.

Every genius obeys the true principle. It is because a genius is
involuntarily under the law of his art that he is pervaded by its
power. But we who have only talent must learn the laws of genius,
which are the laws of Nature, and by careful study and steady
practice in shunning all personal obstructions to the laws, bring
ourselves under their sway.

Who would wish to play on a stringed instrument already vibrating
with the touch of some one else, or even with the last touch we
ourselves gave it. What noise, what discord, with no possible
harmonies! So it is with our nerves and muscles. They cannot be used
for artistic purposes to the height of their best powers while they
are tense and vibrating to our own personal states or habits; so
that the first thing is to free them absolutely, and not only keep
them free by constant practice, but so train them that they will
become perfectly free at a moment's notice, and ready to respond
clearly to whatever the heart and the mind want to express.

The finer the instrument, the lighter the touch it will vibrate to.
Indeed it must have a light touch to respond clearly with musical
harmonies; any other touch would blur. With a fine piano or a
violin, whether the effect is to be _piano_ or _fortissimo,_ the
touch should be only with the amount of force needed to give a clear
vibration, and the ease with which a fortissimo effect is thus
produced is astonishing. It is only those with the most delicate
touch who can produce from a fine piano grand and powerful harmonies
without a blur.

The response in a human instrument to a really light touch is far
more wonderful than that from any instrument made by man; and bodily
effort blurs just as much more in proportion. The muscles are all so
exquisitely balanced in their power for co-ordinate movement, that a
muscle pulling one way is almost entirely freed from effort by the
equalizing power of the antagonizing muscle; and at some rare
moments when we have really found the equilibrium and can keep it,
we seem to do no more than _think_ a movement or a tone or a
combination of words, and they come with so slight a physical
exertion that it seems like no effort at all.

So far are we from our possibilities in this lightness of touch in
the use of our bodies, that it is impossible now for most of us to
touch as lightly as would, after training, bring the most powerful
response. One of the best laws for artistic practice is, "Every day
less effort, every day more power." As the art of acting is the only
art where the whole body is used with no subordinate instrument, let
us look at that with regard to the best results to be obtained by
means of relief from superfluous tension. The effects of unnecessary
effort are strongly felt in the exhaustion which follows the
interpretation of a very exciting role. It is a law without
exception, that if I absorb an emotion and allow my own nerves to be
shaken by it, I fail to give it in all its expressive power to the
audience; and not only do I fall far short in my artistic
interpretation, but because of that very failure, come off the stage
with just so much nervous force wasted. Certain as this law is, and
infallible as are its effects, it is not only generally disbelieved,
but it is seldom thought of at all. I must feet Juliet in my heart,
understand her with my mind, and let her vibrate clearly _across_ my
nerves, to the audience. The moment I let my nerves be shaken as
Juliet's nerves were in reality, I am absorbing her myself, misusing
nervous force, preparing to come off the stage thoroughly exhausted,
and keeping her away from the audience. The present low state of the
drama is largely due to this failure to recognize and practise a
natural use of the nervous force. To work up an emotion, a most
pernicious practice followed by young aspirants, means to work your
nerves up to a state of mild or even severe hysteria. This morbid,
inartistic, nervous excitement actually trains men and women to the
loss of all emotional control, and no wonder that their nerves play
the mischief with them, and that the atmosphere of the stage is kept
in its present murkiness. The power to work the nerves up in the
beginning finally carries them to the state where they must be more
artificially urged by stimulants; and when the actor is off the
stage he has no self-control at all. This all means misused and
over-used force. In no schools is the general influence so
absolutely morbid and unwholesome, as in most of the schools of
elocution and acting.

The methods by which the necessity for artificial stimulants can be
overcome are so simple and so pleasant and so immediately effective,
that it is worth taking the time and space to describe them briefly.
Of course, to begin with, the body must be trained to perfect
freedom in repose, and then to freedom in its use. A very simple way
of practising is to take the most relaxed attitude possible, and
then, without changing it, to recite _with all the expression that
belongs to it_ some poem or selection from a play full of emotional
power. You will become sensitive at once to any new tension, and
must stop and drop it. At first, an hour's daily practice will be
merely a beginning over and over,--the nervous tension will be so
evident,--but the final reward is well worth working and waiting
for.

It is well to begin by simply inhaling through the nose, and
exhaling quietly through the mouth several times; then inhale and
exhale an exclamation in every form of feeling you can think of Let
the exclamation come as easily and freely as the breath alone,
without superfluous tension in any part of the body. So much freedom
gained, inhale as before, and exhale brief expressive
sentences,--beginning with very simple expressions, and taking
sentences that express more and more feeling as your freedom is
better established. This practice can be continued until you are
able to recite the potion scene in Juliet, or any of Lady Macbeth's
most powerful speeches, with an case and freedom which is
surprising. This refers only to the voice; the practice which has
been spoken of in a previous chapter brings the same effect in
gesture.

It will be readily seen that this power once gained, no actor would
find it necessary to skip every other night, in consequence of the
severe fatigue which follows the acting of an emotional role. Not
only is the physical fatigue saved, but the power of expression, the
power for intense acting, so far as it impresses the audience, is
steadily increased.

The inability of young persons to express an emotion which they feel
and appreciate heartily, can be always overcome in this way.
Relaxing frees the channels, and the channels being open the real
poetic or dramatic feeling cannot be held back. The relief is as if
one were let out of prison. Personal faults that come from
self-consciousness and nervous tension may be often cured entirely
without the necessity of drawing attention to them, simply by
relaxing.

Dramatic instinct is a delicate perception of, quick and keen
sympathies for, and ability to express the various phases of human
nature. Deep study and care are necessary for the best development
of these faculties; but the nerves must be left free to be guided to
the true expression,--neither allowed to vibrate to the ecstatic
delight of the impressions, or in mistaken sympathy with them, but
kept clear as conductors of all the heart can feel and the mind
understand in the character or poem to be interpreted.

This may sound cold. It is not; it is merely a process of relieving
superfluous nervous tension in acting, by which obstructions are
removed so that real sympathetic emotions can be stronger and
fuller, and perceptions keener. Those who get no farther than
emotional vibrations of the nerves in acting, know nothing whatever
of the greatness or power of true dramatic instinct.

There are three distinct schools of dramatic art,--one may be called
dramatic hysteria, the second dramatic hypocrisy. The first means
emotional excitement and nervous exhaustion; the second artificial
simulation of a feeling. Dramatic sincerity is the third school, and
the school that seems most truly artistic. What a wonderful training
is that which might,--which ought to be given an actor to help him
rise to the highest possibility of his art!

A free body, exquisitely responsive to every command of the mind, is
absolutely necessary; therefore there should be a perfect physical
training. A quick and keen perception to appreciate noble thoughts,
holding each idea distinctly, and knowing the relations of each idea
to the others, must certainly be cultivated; for in acting, every
idea, every word, should come clearly, each taking its own place in
the thought expressed.

Broad human sympathies, the imaginative power of identifying himself
with all phases of human nature, if he has an ideal in his
profession above the average, an actor cannot lack. This last is
quite impossible without broad human charity; for "to observe truly
you must sympathize with those you observe, and to sympathize with
them you must love them, and to love them you must forget yourself."
And all these requisites--the physical state, the understanding, and
the large heart--seem to centre in the expression of a well-trained
voice,--a voice in which there is the minimum of body and the
maximum of soul.

By training, I always mean a training into Nature. As I have said
before, if art is Nature illuminated, we must find Nature before we
can reach art. The trouble is that in acting, more than in any other
art, the distinction between what is artistic and what is artificial
is neither clearly understood nor appreciated; yet so marked is the
difference when once we see it, that the artificial may well be
called the hell of art, as art itself is heavenly.

Sincerity and simplicity are the foundations of art. A feigning of
either is often necessary to the artificial, but many times
impossible. Although the external effect of this natural training is
a great saving of nervous force in acting, the height of its power
cannot be reached except through a simple aim, from the very heart,
toward sincere artistic expression.

So much for acting. It is a magnificent study, and should be more
truly wholesome in its effects than any other art, because it deals
with the entire body. But, alas I it seems now the most thoroughly
morbid and unwholesome.

All that has been said of acting will apply also to singing,
especially to dramatic singing and study for opera; only with
singing even more care should be taken. No singer realizes the
necessity of a quiet, absolutely free body for the best expression
of a high note, until having gained a certain physical freedom
without singing, she takes a high note and is made sensitive to the
superfluous tension all over the body, and later learns to reach the
same note with the repose which is natural; then the contrast
between the natural and the unnatural methods of singing becomes
most evident,--and not with high notes alone, but with all notes,
and all combinations of notes. I speak of the high note first,
because that is an extreme; for with the majority of singers there
is always more or less fear when a high note is coming lest it may
not be reached easily and with all the clearness that belongs to it.
This fear in itself is tension. For that reason one must learn to
relax to a high note. A free body relieves the singer immensely from
the mechanism of singing. So perfect is the unity of the body that a
voice will not obey perfectly unless the body, as a whole, be free.
Once secure in the freedom of voice and body to obey, the song can
burst forth with all the musical feeling, and all the deep
appreciation of the words of which the singer is capable. Now,
unfortunately, it is not unusual in listening to a public singer, to
feel keenly that he is entirely adsorbed in the mechanism of his
art.

If this freedom is so helpful, indeed so necessary, to reach one's
highest power in singing, it is absolutely essential on the operatic
stage. With it we should have less of the wooden motion so common to
singers in opera. When one is free, physically free, the music seems
to draw out the acting. With a great composer and an interpreter
free to respond, the music and the body of the actor are one in
their power of expressing the emotions. And the songs without words
of the interludes so affect the spirit of the singer that, whether
quiet or in motion, he seems, through being a living embodiment of
the music, to impress the sense of seeing so that it increases the
pleasure of hearing.

I am aware that this standard is ideal; but it is not impossible to
approach it,--to come at least much nearer to it than we do now,
when the physical movements on the stage are such, that one wants to
listen to most operas with closed eyes.

We have considered artistic expression when the human body alone is
the instrument. When the body is merely a means to the use of a
secondary instrument, a primary training of the body itself is
equally necessary.

A pianist practises for hours to command his fingers and gain a
touch which will bring the soul from his music, without in the least
realizing that so long as he is keeping other muscles in his body
tense, and allowing the nervous force to expend itself unnecessarily
in other directions, there never will be clear and open channels
from his brain to his fingers; and as he literally plays with his
brain, and not with his fingers, free channels for a magnetic touch
are indispensable.

To watch a body _give_ to the rhythm of the music in playing is most
fascinating. Although the motion is slight, the contrast between
that and a pianist stiff and rigid with superfluous tension is, very
marked, and the difference in touch when one relaxes to the music
with free channels has been very clearly proved. Beside this, the
freedom in mechanism which follows the exercises for arms and hands
is strikingly noticeable.

With the violin, the same physical equilibrium of motion must be
gained; in fact it is equally necessary in all musical performance,
as the perfect freedom of the body is always necessary before it can
reach its highest power in the use of any secondary instrument.

In painting, the freer a body is the more perfectly the mind can
direct it. How often we can see clearly in our minds a straight line
or a curve or a combination of both, but our hands will not obey the
brain, and the picture fails. It does not by any means follow that
with free bodies we can direct the hand at once to whatever the
brain desires, but simply that by making the body free, and so a
perfect servant of the mind, it can be brought to obey the mind in a
much shorter time and more directly, and so become a truer channel
for whatever the mind wishes to accomplish.

In the highest art, whatever form it may take, the law of simplicity
is perfectly illustrated.

It would be tiresome to go through a list of the various forms of
artistic expression; enough has been said to show the necessity for
a free body, sensitive to respond to, quick to obey, and open to
express the commands of its owner.






XVI.

TESTS





ADOPTING the phrase of our forefathers, with all its force and
brevity, we say, "The proof of the pudding is in the eating."

If the laws adduced in this book are Nature's laws, they should
preserve us in health and strength. And so they do just so far as we
truly and fully obey them.

Then are students and teachers of these laws never ill, never run
down, "nervous," or prostrated? Yes, they are sometimes ill,
sometimes run down and overworked, and suffer the many evil effects
ensuing; but the work which has produced these results is much
greater and more laborious than would have been possible without the
practice of the principles. At the same time their states of illness
occur because they only partially obey the laws. In the degree which
they obey they will be preserved from the effects of tensity,
overstrung nerves, and generally worn-out bodies; and in sickness
coming from other causes--mechanical, hereditary, etc.--again,
according to their obedience, they will be held in all possible
physical and mental peace, so that the disease may wither and drop
like the decayed leaf of a plant.

As well might we ask of the wisest clergyman in the land, Do his
truths _never_ fail him? Is he _always_ held in harmony and nobility
by their power? However great and good the man may be, this state of
perfection will never be reached in this world.

In exact parallel to the spiritual laws upon which all universal
truth, of all religions, is founded, are the truths of this teaching
of physical peace and equilibrium. As religion applies to all the
needs of the soul, so this applies to all the needs of the body. As
a man may be continually progressing in nobility of thought and
action, and yet find himself under peculiar circumstances tried even
to the stumbling point,--so may the student of bodily quiet and
equilibrium, who appears even to a very careful observer to be in
surprising possession of his forces, under a similar test stumble
and fall into some form of the evil effects out of which he has had
power to lead others.

It is important that this parallelism should be recognized, that the
unity of these truths may be finally accomplished in the living;
therefore we repeat, Is this any more possible than that the full
control of the soul should be at once possessed?

Think of the marvellous construction of the human body,--the
exquisite adjustment of its economy. Could a power of control
sufficient to apply to its every detail be fully acquired at once,
or even in a life-time?

But when one does fall who has made himself even partially at one
with Nature's way of living, the power of patient waiting for relief
is very different. He separates himself from his ailments in a way
which without the preparation would be to him unknown. He has,
without drug or other external assistance, an anodyne always within
himself which he can use at pleasure. He positively experiences that
"underneath are the everlasting arms," and the power to experience
this gives him much respite from pain.

Pain is so often prolonged and accentuated _by dwelling in its
memory, _living in a self-pity of the time when it shall come again!
The patient who comes to his test with the bodily and mental repose
already acquired, cuts off each day from the last, each hour from
the last, one might almost say each breath from the last, so strong
is his confidence in the renewal of forces possible to those who
give themselves quite trustfully into Nature's hands.

It is not that they refuse external aid or precaution. No; indeed
the very quiet within makes them feel most keenly when it is orderly
to rest and seek the advice of others. Also it makes them faithful
in following every direction which will take them back into the
rhythm of a healthful life.

But while they do this they do not centre upon it. They take the
precautions as a means and not as an end. They centre upon that
which they have within themselves, and they know that that possible
power being in a state of disorder and chaos no one or all of the
outside measures are of any value.

As patients prepared by the work return into normal life, the false
exhilaration, which is a sure sign of another stumble, is seen and
avoided. They have learned a serious lesson in economy, and they
profit by it. Where they were free before, they become more so; and
where they were not, they quietly set themselves toward constant
gain. They work at lower pressure, steadily gaining in spreading the
freedom and quiet deeper into their systems, thus lessening the
danger of future falls.

Let us state some of the causes for "breaking down," even while
trying well to learn Nature's ways.

First, a trust in one's own capacity for freedom and quiet. "I can
do this, now that I know how to relax." When truly considered, the
thing is out of reason, and we should say, "Because I know how to
relax, I see that I must not do this."

The case is the same with the gymnast who greatly overtaxes his
muscle, having foolishly concluded that because he has had some
training he can successfully meet the test. There is nothing so
truly stupid as self-satisfaction; and these errors, with all others
of the same nature, re fruits of our stupidity, and unless shunned
surely lead us into trouble.

Some natures, after practice, relax so easily that they are soon met
by the dangers of overrelaxation. Let them remember that it is
really equilibrium they are seeking, and by balancing their activity
and their relaxation, and relaxing only as a means to an end,--the
end of greater activity and use later,--they avoid any such ill
effect.

As the gymnast can mistake the purpose of his muscular development,
putting it in the place of greater things, regarding it as an end
instead of a means,--so can he who is training for a better use of
his nervous force. In the latter case, the signs of this error are a
slackened circulation, a loathing to activity, and various
evanescent sensations of peace and satisfaction which bear no test,
vanishing as soon as they are brought to the slightest trial.

Unless you take up your work with fresh interest and renewed vigor
each time after practice, you may know that all is not as it should
be.

To avoid all these mistakes, examine the work of each day and let
the next improve upon it.

If you are in great need of relaxing, take more exercise in the
fresh air. If unable to exercise, get your balance by using slow and
steady breaths, which push the blood vigorously over its path in the
body, and give one, to a degree, the effect of exercise.

Do not mistake the disorders which come at first, when turning away
from an unnatural and wasteful life of contractions, for the effects
of relaxing. Such disorders are no more caused by relaxing than are
the disorders which beset a drunkard or an opium-eater, upon
refusing to continue in the way of his error, primarily caused by
the abandonment of his evil habit, even though the appearance is
that he must return to it in order to re-establish his
pseudo-equilibrium.

One more cause of trouble, especially in working without a guide, is
the habit of going through the form of the exercises without really
doing them. The tests needed here have been spoken of before.

Do not separate your way of practising from your way of living, but
separate your life entirely from your practice while practising,
trying outside of this time always to accomplish the agreement of
the two,--that is, live the economy of force that you are
practising. You can be just as gay, just as vivacious, but without
the fatiguing after-effects.

As you work to gain the ideal equilibrium, if your test comes, do
not be staggered nor dismayed. Avoid its increase by at once giving
careful consideration to the causes, and dropping them. Keep your
life quietly to the form of its usual action, as far as you wisely
can. If you have gained even a little appreciation of equilibrium,
you will not easily mistake and overdo.

When you find yourself becoming bound to the dismal thought of your
test and its terrors, free yourself from it every time, by
concentrating upon the weight of your body, or the slowness of the
slowest breaths you can draw. Keep yourself truly free, and these
feelings of discouragement and all other mental distortions will
steadily lose power, until for you they are no more. If they last
longer than you think they should, persist in every endeavor,
knowing that the after-result, in increased capacity to help
yourself and others, will be in exact ratio to your power of
persistency without succumbing.

The only way to keep truly free, and therefore ready to profit by
the help Nature always has at hand, is to avoid thought of your form
of illness as far as possible. The man with indigestion gives the
stomach the first place in his mind; he is a mass of detailed and
subdued activity, revolving about a monstrous stomach,--his brain,
heart, lungs, and other organs, however orderly they may be, are of
no consideration, and are slowly made the degraded slaves of himself
and his stomach.

The man who does not sleep, worships sleep until all life seems
_sleep,_ and no life any importance without it. He fixes his mind on
not sleeping, rushes for his watch with feverish intensity if a nap
does come, to gloat over its brevity or duration, and then wonders
that each night brings him no more sleep.

There is nothing more contracting to mind and body than such
idol-worship. Neither blood nor nervous fluid can flow as it should.

Let us be sincere in our work, and having gained even one step
toward a true equilibrium, hold fast to it, never minding how
severely we are tempted.

We see the work of quiet and economy, the lack of strain and of
false purpose, in fine old Nature herself; let us constantly try to
do our part to make the picture as evident, as clear and distinct,
in God's greater creation,--Human Nature.






XVII

THE RATIONAL CARE OF SELF





A WOMAN who had had some weeks of especially difficult work for mind
and body, and who had finished it feeling fresh and well, when a
friend expressed surprise at her freedom from fatigue, said, with a
smiling face: "Oh! but I took great care of myself all through it: I
always went to bed early, and rested when it was possible. I was
careful to eat only nourishing food, and to have exercise and fresh
air when I could get them. You see I knew that the work must be
accomplished, and that if I were over-tired I could not do it well."
The work, instead of fatiguing, had evidently refreshed her.

If that same woman had insisted, as many have in similar cases, that
she had no time to think of herself; or if such care had seemed to
her selfish, her work could not have been done as well, she would
have ended it tired and jaded, and would have declared to
sympathizing friends that it was "impossible to do a work like that
without being all tired out," and the sympathizing friends would
have agreed and thought her a heroine.

A well-known author, who had to support his wife and family while
working for a start in his literary career, had a commercial
position that occupied him every day from nine to five. He came home
and dined at six, went to bed at seven, slept until three, when he
got up, made himself a cup of coffee, and wrote until he breakfasted
at eight. He got all the exercise he needed in walking to and from
his outside work and was able to keep up this regular routine, with
no loss of health, until he could support his family comfortably on
what he earned from his pen. Then he returned to ordinary hours.

A brain once roused will take a man much farther than his strength;
if this man had come home tired and allowed himself to write far
into the night, and then, after a short sleep, had gone to the
indispensable earning of his bread and butter, the chances are that
his intellectual power would have decreased, until both publishers
and author would have felt quite certain that he had no power at
all.

The complacent words, "I cannot think of myself," or, "It is out of
the question for me to care for myself," or any other of the various
forms in which the same idea is expressed, come often from those who
are steadily thinking of themselves, and, as a natural consequence,
are so blinded that they cannot see the radical difference between
unselfish care for one's self, as a means to an end, and the selfish
care for one's self which has no other object in view.

The wholesome care is necessary to the best of all good work. The
morbid care means steady decay for body and soul.

We should care for our bodies as a violinist cares for his
instrument. It is the music that comes from his violin which he has
in mind, and he is careful of his instrument because of its musical
power. So we, with some sense of the possible power of a healthy
body, should be careful to keep it fully supplied with fresh air; to
keep it exercised and rested; to supply it with the quality and
quantity of nourishment it needs; and to protect it from unnecessary
exposure. When, through mistake or for any other reason, our bodies
get out of order, instead of dwelling on our discomfort, we should
take immediate steps to bring them back to a normal state.

If we learned to do this as a matter of course, as we keep our hands
clean, even though we had to be conscious of our bodies for a short
time while we were gaining the power, the normal care would lead to
a happy unconsciousness. Carlyle says, and very truly, that we are
conscious of no part of our bodies until it is out of order, and it
certainly follows that the habit of keeping our bodies in order
would lead us eventually to a physical freedom which, since our
childhood, few of us have known. In the same way we can take care of
our minds with a wholesome spirit. We can see to it that they are
exercised to apply themselves well, that they are properly diverted,
and know how to change, easily, from one kind of work to another. We
can be careful not to attempt to sleep directly after severe mental
work, but first to refresh our minds by turning our attention into
entirely different channels in the way of exercise or amusement.

We must not allow our minds to be over-fatigued any more than our
bodies, and we must learn how to keep them in a state of quiet
readiness for whatever work or emergency may be before them.

There is also a kind of moral care which is quite in line with the
care of the mind and the body, and which is a very material aid to
these,--a way of refusing to be irritable, of gaining and
maintaining cheerfulness, kindness, and thoughtfulness for others.

It is well known how much the health of any one part of us depends
upon all the others. The theme of one of Howells's novels is the
steady mental, moral, and physical degeneration of a man from eating
a piece of cold mince-pie at midnight, and the sequence of steps by
which he is led down is a very natural process. Indeed, how much
irritability and unkindness might be traced to chronic indigestion,
which originally must have come from some careless disobedience of
simple physical laws.

When the stomach is out of order, it needs more than its share of
vital force to do its work, and necessarily robs the brain; but when
it is in good condition this force may be used for mental work. Then
again, when we are in a condition of mental strain or unhealthy
concentration, this condition affects our circulation and consumes
force that should properly be doing its work elsewhere, and in this
way the normal balance of our bodies is disturbed.

The physical and mental degeneration that follows upon moral
wrong-doing is too well known to dwell upon. It is self-evident in
conspicuous cases, and very real in cases that are too slight to
attract general attention. We might almost say that little ways of
wrongdoing often produce a worse degeneration, for they are more
subtle in their effects, and more difficult to realize, and
therefore to eradicate.

The wise care for one's self is simply steering into the currents of
law and order,--mentally, morally, and physically. When we are once
established in that life and our forces are adjusted to its
currents, then we can forget ourselves, but not before: and no one
can find these currents of law and order and establish himself in
them, unless he is working for some purpose beyond his own health.
For a man may be out of order physically, mentally, or morally
simply for the want of an aim in life beyond his own personal
concerns. No care is to any purpose--indeed, it is injurious--unless
we are determined to work for an end which is not only useful in
itself, but is cultivating in us a living interest in
accomplishment, and leading us on to more usefulness and more
accomplishment. The physical, mental, and moral man are all three
mutually interdependent, but all the care in the world for each and
all of them can only lead to weakness instead of strength, unless
they are all three united in a definite purpose of useful life for
the benefit of others.

Even a hobby re-acts upon itself and eats up the man who follows it,
unless followed to some useful end. A man interested in a hobby for
selfish purposes alone first refuses to look at anything outside of
his hobby, and later turns his back on everything but his own idea
of his hobby. The possible mental contraction which may follow, is
almost unlimited, and such contraction affects the whole man.

It is just as certain a law for an individual that what he gives out
must have a definite relation to what he takes in, as it is for the
best strength of a country that its imports and exports should be in
proper balance. Indeed, this law is much more evident in the case of
the individual, if we look only a little below the surface. A man
can no more expect to live without giving out to others than a
shoemaker can expect to earn his bread and butter by making shoes
and leaving them piled in a closet.

To be sure, there are many men who are well and happy, and yet, so
far as appearances go, are living entirely for themselves, with not
only no thought of giving, but a decided unwillingness to give. But
their comfort and health are dependent on temporary conditions, and
the external well-being they have acquired would vanish, if a
serious demand were made upon their characters.

Happy the man or woman who, through illness of body or soul, or
through stress of circumstances, is aroused to appreciate the
strengthening power of useful work, and develops a wholesome sense
of the usefulness and necessity of a rational care of self!

Try to convince a man that it is better on all accounts that he
should keep his hands clean and he might answer, "Yes, I appreciate
that; but I have never thought of my hands, and to keep them clean
would make me conscious of them." Try to convince an
unselfishly-selfish or selfishly-unselfish person that the right
care for one's self means greater usefulness to others, and you will
have a most difficult task. The man with dirty hands is quite right
in his answer. To keep his hands clean would make him more conscious
of them, but he does not see that, after he had acquired the habit
of cleanliness, he would only be conscious of his hands when they
were dirty, and that this consciousness could be at any time
relieved by soap and water. The selfishly-unselfish person is right:
it is most pernicious to care for one's self in a self-centred
spirit; and if we cannot get a clear sense of wholesome care of
self, it is better not to care at all.

With a perception of the need for such wholesome care, would come a
growing realization of the morbidness of all self-centred care, and
a clearer, more definite standard of unselfishness. For the
self-centred care takes away life, closes the sympathies, and makes
useful service obnoxious to us; whereas the wholesome care, with
useful service as an end, gives renewed life, an open sympathy, and
growing power for further usefulness.

We do not need to study deeply into the laws of health, but simply
to obey those we know. This obedience will lead to our knowing more
laws and knowing them better, and it will in time become a very
simple matter to distinguish the right care from the wrong, and to
get a living sense of how power increases with the one, and
decreases with the other.






XVIII.

OUR RELATIONS WITH OTHERS





EVERY one will admit that our relations to others should be quiet
and clear, in order to give us freedom for our work. Indeed, to make
these relations quiet and happy is the special work that some of us
have to do. There are laws for health, laws for gaining and keeping
normal nerves, laws for honest, kindly action toward others,--but
the obedience to all these is a dead obedience, and does not lead to
vigorous life, unless accompanied by a hearty love for work and play
with those to whom we stand in natural relations,--both young and
old. It is with life as it is with art, what we do must be done with
love, or it will have no force. Without the living spark of love, we
may have the appearance, but never the spirit, of useful work or
quiet content. Stagnation is not peace, and there can be no life,
and so no living peace, without happy relations with those about us.

The more we realize the practical strength of the law which bids us
love our neighbor as ourselves, and the more we act upon it, the
more quickly we gain the habit of pleasant, patient friendliness,
which sooner or later may beget the same friendliness in return. In
this kind of friendly relation there is a savor which so surpasses
the unhealthy snap of disagreement, that any one who truly finds it
will soon feel the fallacy of the belief that "between friends there
must be a little quarrelling, to give spice to friendship."

To be willing that every one should be himself, and work out his
salvation in his own way, seems to be the first principle of the
working plan drawn from the law of loving your neighbor as yourself.
If we drop all selfish resistance to the ways of others, however
wrong or ignorant they may be, we are more free to help them to
better ways when they turn to us for help. It is in pushing and
being pushed that we feel most strain in all human relations.

We wait willingly for the growth of plants, and do not complain, or
try in abnormal ways to force them to do what is entirely contrary
to the laws of nature; and if we paid more attention to the laws of
human nature, we should not stunt the growth of children, relatives,
and friends by resisting their efforts,--or their lack of
effort,--or by trying to force them into ways that we think must be
right for them because we are sure they are right for us.

There is a selfish, restless way of pushing others "for their own
good" and straining to "help" them, and there is a selfish, entirely
thoughtless way of letting them alone; it is difficult to tell which
is the worse, or which does more harm. The first is the attitude of
unconscious hypocrisy; the second is that of selfish indifference.
It is in letting alone, with a loving readiness to help, that we
find strength and peace for ourselves in our relations with others.

All great laws are illustrated most clearly in their simplest forms,
and there is no better way to get a sense of really free and
wholesome relations with others than from the relations of a mother
with her baby. Even healthy reciprocity is there, in all the fulness
of its best beginnings, and the results of wholesome, rational,
maternal care are evident to the delighted observer in the joyous
freedom with which the baby mind develops according to the laws of
its own life.

Heidi is a baby not yet a year old, and is left alone a large part
of the day. Having no amusements imposed upon her, she has formed
the habit of entertaining herself in her own way; she greets you
with the most fascinating little gurgles, and laughs up at you when
you stop and speak to her as if to say, "How do you do? I am having
a _very_ happy time!" Five minutes' smiling and being smiled at by
her gives a friend who stops to talk "a _very_ happy time" too. If
you take her up for a little while, she stays quietly and looks at
you, then at the trees or at something in the room, then at her own
hand. If you say "ah," or "oo," she answers with a vowel too; so the
conversation begins and goes on, with jolly little laughter every
now and then, and when you give her a gentle kiss and put her down,
her good-bye is a very contented one, and her "Thank you; please
come again," is quite as plainly understood as if she had said it.
You leave her, feeling that you have had a very happy visit with one
of your best friends.

Heidi is not officiously interfered with; she has the best of care.
When she cries, every means is taken to find the cause of her
trouble; and when the trouble is remedied, she stops. She is a dear
little friend, and gives and takes, and grows.

Another baby of the same age is Peggy. She is needlessly handled and
caressed. She is kissed a hundred times a day with rough affection,
which is mistaken for tenderness and love. She is "bounced" up and
down and around; and the people about her, who believe themselves
her friends and would be heartbroken if she were taken from them,
talk at her, and not with her; they make her do "cunning little
things," and then laugh and admire; they try over and over to force
her to speak words when her little brain is not ready for the
effort; and when she is awake, she is almost constantly surrounded
by "loving" noise. Peggy is capable of being as good a friend as
Heidi, but she is not allowed to be. Her family are so overwhelmed
by their own feelings of love and admiration that they really only
love themselves in her, for they give her not the slightest
opportunity to be herself. The poor baby has sleepless, crying
nights, and a little irritating illness hanging about her all the
time; the doctor is called, and every one wonders why she should be
ill; every one worries about her; but the caressing and noisy
affection go on. Although much of the difference between these two
babies could probably be accounted for by differences of heredity
and temperament, it nevertheless remains true that it is very
largely the result of a difference between wise and foolish parents.

The real friendship which her mother gave to Heidi, and which
resulted in her happy, placid ways and quickly responsive
intelligence, meets with a like response in older children; and
reciprocal friendship grows in strength and in pleasure both for
child and older friend, as the child grows older. When a child is
permitted the freedom of his own individuality, he can show the best
in himself. When he is tempted to go wrong, he can be rationally
guided in the right way in such a manner that he will accept the
guidance as an act of friendship; and to that friendship he will
feel bound in honor to be true, because he knows that we, his
friends, are obeying the same laws. Of course all this comes to him
from no conscious action of his own mind, but from an unconscious,
contented recognition of the state of mind of his older friends.

A poor woman, who lived in one room with her husband and two
children, said once in a flash of new intelligence, "Now I see: the
more I hollers, the more the children hollers; I am not going to
holler any more." There are various grades of "hollering;" we
"holler" often without a sound, and the child feels it, and
"hollers" with many sounds which are distressing to him and to us.

It is primarily true with babies and young children that "if you
want to have a friend, you must be a friend." If we want courtesy
and kindliness from a child, we must be courteous and kindly to him.
Not in outside ways alone,--a child quickly feels the sham of mere
superficial attention,--but sincerely, with a living interest.

So should we truly, from our inmost selves, meet a child as if he
were of our own age, and as if we were of his age. This sounds like
a paradox, but indeed the one proposition is essential to the other.
If we meet a child only as if he were of our age, our attitude tends
to make him a little prig; if we meet him as if we were as young as
he is, his need for maturer influences produces a lack of balance
which we must both feet; but if we sincerely meet him as if the
exchange of age were mutual, we find common ground and valuable
companionship.

This mutual understanding is the basis of all true friendship. Only
read, instead of "age," "habit of mind," "character," "state," and
we have the whole. It is aiming for reciprocal relations, from the
best in us to the best in others, and from the best in others to the
best in ourselves. It is the foundation of all that is
strengthening, and quiet, and happy, in all human intercourse with
young and old.

To gain the friendly habit is more difficult with our contemporaries
than it is with children. We have no right to guide older people
unless they want to be guided, and they often want to guide us in
ways we do not like at all. We have no right to try to change their
opinions, unless they ask us for new light; and they often insist
upon trying to change ours whether we ask them or not. There is sure
to be selfish resistance in us when we complain of it in others, and
we must acknowledge it and get free from it before we can give or
find the most helpful sympathy.

A healthy letting people alone, and a good wholesome scouring of
ourselves, will, if it is to come at all, bring open friendliness.
If it is not to come, then the healthy letting people alone should
continue, for it is possible to live in the same house with a wilful
and trying character, and live at peace, if he is lovingly let
alone. If he is unlovingly let alone, the peace will be only on the
outside, and must sooner or later give way to storms, or, what is
much worse, harden into unforgiving selfishness.

Our influence with others depends primarily upon what we are, and
only secondarily upon what we think or upon what we say. It is so
with babies and young children, and more so with our older friends.
If we honestly feel that there is something for us to learn from
another, however wrong or ignorant, in some ways, he may seem, we
are not only more able to find and profit by the best in him, but
also to give to him in return whatever he may be ready to receive.
How little quiet comfort there is in families where useless
resistance to one another is habitual! Members of one family often
live along together with more or less appearance of good fellowship,
but with an inner strain which gives them drawn faces and tired
bodies, or else throws them back upon themselves in the enjoyment of
their own selfishness; and sometimes there is not even the
appearance of good fellowship, but a chronic resistance and
disagreement, all for the want of a little sympathy and common
sense.

It is the sensitive people that suffer most, and their sensitiveness
is deplored by the family and by themselves. If they could only know
how great a gift their sensitiveness is! To appreciate this, it must
be used to find and feel the good in others, not to make us
abnormally alive to real or fancied slights. We must use it to
enlarge our sympathies and help us understand the wrong-doing of
others enough to point the way, if possible, to better things, not
merely to criticise and blame them. Only in such ways can we learn
to realize and use the delicate power of sensitiveness. Selfish
sensitiveness is a blessing turned to a curse; but the more lovingly
sensitive we become to the need of moral freedom in our friends, the
Dearer we are led to our own.

There are no human relations that do not illustrate the law which
bids me "love my neighbor as myself;" especially clearly is it
revealed,--in its breach of observance,--in the comparatively
external relations of host and guest in ordinary social life, and in
the happiness that can be given and received when it is readily
obeyed.

A lady once said, "I go into my bedroom and take note of all the
conveniences I have there, and then look about my guest chamber to
see that it is equally well and appropriately furnished." She
succeeds in her object in the guest chamber if she is the kind of
hostess to her guest that she would have her guest be to her; not
that her guest's tastes are necessarily her own, but that she knows
how to find out what they are and how to satisfy them.

It is often difficult to love our neighbor as ourselves because we
do not know how to love ourselves. We are selfish, or stupid, or
aggressive with ourselves, or try too hard for what is right and
good, instead of trusting with inner confidence and reverence to a
power that is above us.

Over-thoughtfulness for others, in little things or great, is
oppressive, and as much an enemy to peace, as the lack of any
thoughtfulness at all. It is like too much attention to the baby,
and comes from the same kind of selfish affection, with--frequently
the added motive of wanting to appear disinterested.

One might give pages of examples showing the right and the wrong way
in all the varied relations of life, but they would all show that
the right way comes from obedience to the law of unselfishness. To
obey this law we must respect our neighbor's rights as we respect
our own; we must gain and keep the clear and quiet atmosphere that
we like to find about our friend; we must shun everything that would
interfere with a loving kindliness toward him, as we would have him
show the same kindliness toward us. We must know that we and our
friends are one, and that, unless a relation is a mutual benefit, it
is no true relation at all. But, first of all, we must remember that
a true appreciation of the wonderful power of this law comes only
with daily, patient working, and waiting for the growth it brings.

In so far as we are truly the friend of one, whether he be baby,
child, or grown man,--shall we be truly the friend of all; in so far
as we are truly the friend of all, shall we be truly the friend of
every one; and, as we find the living peace of this principle, and a
greater freedom from selfishness,--whether of affection or
dislike,--those who truly belong to us will gravitate to our sides,
and we shall gravitate to theirs. Each one of us will understand his
own relation to the rest,--whether remote or close,--for in that
quiet light it will be seen to rest on intelligible law, which only
the fog and confusion of selfishness concealed.






XIX.

THE USE OF THE WILL





IT is not generally recognized that the will can be trained, little
by little, by as steadily normal a process as the training of a
muscle, and that such training must be through regular daily
exercise, and as slow in its effects as the training of a muscle is
slow. Perhaps we are unconsciously following, as a race, the law
that Froebel has given for the beginnings of individual education,
which bids us lead from the "outer to the inner," from the known to
the unknown. There is so much more to be done to make methods of
muscular training perfect, that we have not yet come to appreciate
the necessity for a systematic training of the will. Every
individual, however, who recognizes the need of such training and
works accordingly, is doing his part to hasten a more intelligent
use of the will by humanity in general.

When muscles are trained abnormally their development weakens,
instead of strengthening, the whole system. Great muscular strength
is often deceptive in the appearance of power that it gives; it
often effectually hides, under a strong exterior, a process of
degeneration which is going on within, and it is not uncommon for an
athlete to die of heart disease or pulmonary consumption.

This is exactly analogous to the frequently deceptive appearance of
great strength of will. The will is trained abnormally when it is
used only in the direction of personal desire, and the undermining
effect upon the character in this case is worse than the weakening
result upon the body in the case of abnormal muscular development. A
person who is persistently strong in having his own way may be found
inconsistently weak when he is thwarted in his own way. This
weakness is seldom evident to the general public, because a man with
a strong will to accomplish his own ends is quick to detect and hide
any appearance of weakness, when he knows that it will interfere
with whatever he means to do. The weakness, however, is none the
less certainly there, and is often oppressively evident to those
from whom he feels that he has nothing to gain.

When the will is truly trained to its best strength, it is trained
to obey; not to obey persons or arbitrary ideas, but to obey laws of
life which are as fixed and true in their orderly power, as the
natural laws which keep the suns and planets in their appointed
spheres. There is no one who, after a little serious reflection, may
not be quite certain of two or three fixed laws, and as we obey the
laws we know, we find that we discover more.

To obey truly we must use our wills to yield as well as to act.
Often the greatest strength is gained through persistent yielding,
for to yield entirely is the most difficult work a strong will can
do, and it is doing the most difficult work that brings the greatest
strength.

To take a simple example: a small boy with a strong will is troubled
with stammering. Every time he stammers it makes him angry, and he
pushes and strains and exerts himself with so much effort to speak,
that the stammering, in consequence, increases. If he were told to
do something active and very painful, and to persist in it until his
stammering were cured, he would set his teeth and go through the
work like a soldier, so as to be free from the stammering in the
shortest possible time. But when he is told that he must relax his
body and stop pushing, in order to drop the resistance that causes
his trouble, he fights against the idea with all his little might.
It is all explained to him, and he understands that it is his only
road to smooth speaking; but the inherited tendency to use his will
only in resistance is so strong, that at first it seems impossible
for him to use it in any other way.

The fact that the will sometimes gains its greatest power by
yielding seems such a paradox that it is not strange that it takes
us long to realize it. Indeed, the only possible realization of it
is through practice.

The example of the little stammering boy is an illustration that
applies to many other cases of the same need for giving up
resistance.

No matter how actively we need to use our wills, it is often,
necessary to drop all self-willed resistance first, before we begin
an action, if we want to succeed with the least possible effort and
the best result.

When we use the will forcibly to resist or to repress, we are simply
straining our nerves and muscles, and are exerting ourselves in a
way which must eventually be weakening, not only to them, but to the
will itself. We are using the will normally when, without repression
or unnecessary effort, we are directing the muscles and nerves in
useful work. We want "training and not straining" as much for the
will as for the body, and only in that way does the will get its
strength.

The world admires a man for the strength of his will if he can
control the appearance of anger, whereas the only strength of will
that is not spurious is that which controls the anger itself. We
have had the habit for so long of living in appearances, that it is
only by a slow process that we acquire a strong sense of their
frailty and lack of genuine value. In order to bring the will, by
training, out of the region of appearances into that of realities,
we must learn to find the true causes of weakness and use our wills
little by little to remove them. To remove the external effect does
no permanent good and produces an apparent strength which only hides
an increasing weakness.

Imagine, for instance, a woman with an emotional, excitable nature
who is suffering from jealousy; she does not call it jealousy, she
calls it "sensitive nerves," and the doctors call it "hysteria." She
has severe attacks of "sensitive nerves" or "hysteria" every time
her jealousy is excited. It is not uncommon for such persistent
emotional strain, with its effect upon the circulation and other
functions of the body, to bring on organic disease. In such a case
the love of admiration, and the strength of will resulting from that
selfish desire, makes her show great fortitude, for which she
receives much welcome praise. That is the effect she wants, and in
the pose of a wonderful character she finds it easy to produce more
fortitude--and so win more admiration.

A will that is strong for the wrong, may--if taken in time--become
equally strong for the right. Perversion is not, at first, through
lack of will, but through the want of true perception to light the
way to its intelligent use.

A man sometimes appears to be without power of will who is only
using a strong will in the wrong way, but if he continues in his
wrong course long enough, his weakness becomes real.

If a woman who begins her nervous degeneration by indulging herself
in jealousy--which is really a gross emotion, however she may refine
it in appearance--could be made to see the truth, she would, in many
cases, be glad to use her will in the right direction, and would
become in reality the beautiful character which her friends believe
her to be. This is especially true because this moral and nervous
perversion often attacks the finest natures. But when such
perversion is allowed to continue, the sufferer's strength is always
prominent in external dramatic effects, but disappears oppressively
when she is brought face to face with realities.

Many people who are nervous invalids, and many who are not, are
constantly weakening themselves and making themselves suffer by
using their wills vigorously in every way _but_ that which is
necessary to their moral freedom: by bearing various unhappy effects
with so-called stoicism, or fighting against them with their eyes
tight shut to the real cause of their suffering, and so hiding an
increasing weakness under an appearance of strength.

A ludicrous and gross example of this misuse of the will may be
observed in men or women who follow vigorously and ostentatiously
paths of self-sacrifice which they have marked out for themselves,
while overlooking entirely places where self-denial is not only
needed for their better life, but where it would add greatly to the
happiness and comfort of others.

It is curious a such weakness is common with people who are
apparently very intelligent; and parallel with this are cases of men
who are remarkably strong in the line of their own immediate
careers, and proportionately weak in every other phase of their
lives. We very seldom find a soldier, or a man who is powerful in
politics, who can answer in every principle and action of his life
to Wordsworth's "Character of the Happy Warrior."

Absurd as futile self-sacrifice seems, it is not less well balanced
than the selfish fortitude of a jealous woman or than the apparent
strength of a man who can only work forcibly for selfish ends. The
wisest use of the will can only grow with the decrease of
self-indulgence.

"Nervous" women are very effective examples of the perversion of a
strong will. There are women who will work themselves into an
illness and seem hopelessly weak when they are not having their own
way, who would feel quite able to give dinner parties at which they
could be prominent in whatever role they might prefer, and would
forget their supposed weakness with astonishing rapidity. When
things do not go to please such women, they are weak and ill; when
they stand out among their friends according to their own ideal of
themselves and are sufficiently flattered, they enter into work
which is far beyond their actual strength, and sooner or later break
down only to be built up on another false basis.

This strong will turned the wrong way is called "hysteria," or
"neurasthenia," or "degeneracy." It may be one of these or all
three, _in its effect,_ but the training of the will to overcome the
cause, which is always to be found in some kind of selfishness,
would cure the hysteric, give the neurasthenic more wholesome
nerves, and start the degenerate on a course of regeneration. At
times it would hardly surprise us to hear that a child with a
stomach-ache crying for more candy was being treated for "hysteria"
and studied as a "degenerate." Degenerate he certainly is, but only
until he can be taught to deny himself candy when it is not good for
him, with quiet and content.

There are many petty self-indulgences which, if continually
practised, can do great and irreparable harm in undermining the
will. Every man or woman knows his own little weaknesses best, but
that which leads to the greatest harm is the excuse, "It is my
temperament; if I were not tardy, or irritable, or untidy,"--or
whatever it may be,--"I would not be myself." Our temperament is
given us as a servant, not as a master; and when we discover that an
inherited perversion of temperament can be trained to its opposite
good, and train it so, we do it not at a loss of individuality, but
at a great gain. This excuse of "temperament" is often given as a
reason for not yielding. The family will is dwelt upon with a pride
which effectually prevents it from keeping its best strength, and
blinds the members of the family to the weakness that is sure to
come, sooner or later, as a result of the misuse of the inheritance
of which they are so proud.

If we train our wills to be passive or active, as the need may be,
in little things, that prepares us for whatever great work may be
before us, just as in the training of a muscle, the daily gentle
exercise prepares it to lift a great weight.

Whether in little ways or in great ways, it is stupid and useless to
expect to gain real strength, unless we are working in obedience to
the laws that govern its development. We have a faculty for
distinguishing order from disorder and harmony from discord, which
grows in delicacy and strength as we use it, and we can only use it
through refusing disorder and choosing order. As our perception
grows, we choose more wisely, and as we choose more wisely, our
perception grows. But our perceptions must work in causes, not at
all in effects, except as they lead us to a knowledge of causes. We
must, above all, train our wills as a means of useful work. It is
impossible to perfect ourselves for the sake of ourselves.

It is a happy thing to have been taught the right use of the will as
a child, but those of us who have not been so taught, can be our own
fathers and our own mothers, and we must be content with a slow
growth. We are like babies learning to walk. The baby tries day
after day, and does not feel any strain, or wake in the morning with
a distressing sense of "Oh! I must practise walking to-day. When
shall I have finished learning?" He works away, time after time
falling down and picking himself up, and some one day finally walks,
without thinking about it any more. So we, in the training of our
wills, need to work patiently day by day; if we fall, we must pick
ourselves up and go on, and just as the laws of balance guide the
baby, so the laws of life will carry us.

When the baby has succeeded in walking, he is not elated at his new
power, but uses it quietly and naturally to accomplish his ends. We
cannot realize too strongly that any elation or personal pride on
our part in a better use of the will, not only obstructs its growth,
but is directly and immediately weakening.

A quiet, intelligent use of the will is at the root of all
character; and unselfish, well-balanced character, with the insight
which it develops, will lead us to well-balanced nerves.






SUMMING UP





TO sum it all up, the nerves are conductors for impression and
expression. As channels, they should be as free as Emerson's "smooth
hollow tube," for transmission from without in, and from within out.
Thus the impressions will be clear, and the expressions powerful.

The perversions in the way of allowing to the nerves the clear
conducting power which Nature would give them are, so far as the
body is concerned, unnecessary fatigue and strain caused by not
resting entirely when the times come for rest, and by working with
more than the amount of force needed to accomplish our ends,--thus
defying the natural laws of equilibrium and economy. Not only in the
ways mentioned do we defy these most powerful laws, but, because of
carelessness in nourishment and want of normal exercise out of
doors, we make the establishment of such equilibrium impossible.

The nerves can never be open channels while the body wants either
proper nourishment, the stimulus that comes from open air exercise,
perfect rest, or true economy of force in running the human machine.

The physical training should be a steady shunning of personal
perversions until the nervous system is in a natural state, and the
muscles work in direct obedience to the will with the exquisite
co-ordination which is natural to them.

The same equilibrium must be found in the use of the mind. Rest must
be complete when taken, and must balance the effort in work,--rest
meaning often some form of recreation as well as the passive rest of
steep. Economy of effort should be gained through normal
concentration,--that is, the power of erasing all previous
impressions and allowing a subject to hold and carry us, by dropping
every thought or effort that interferes with it, in muscle, nerve,
and mind. The nerves of the senses must be kept clear through this
same ability to drop all previous impressions.

First in importance, and running all through the previous training,
is the use of the will, from which all these servants, mental and
physical, receive their orders,--true or otherwise as the will
itself obeys natural and spiritual laws in giving them. The
perversions in the will to be shunned are misuse of muscles by want
of economy in force and power of direction; abuse of the nervous
system by unwisely dwelling upon pain and illness beyond the
necessary care for the relief of either, or by allowing sham
emotions, irritability, and all other causes of nervous distemper to
overcome us.

The remedy for this is to make a peaceful state possible through a
normal training of the physique; to realize and follow a wholesome
life in all its phases; to recognize daily more fully through
obedience the great laws of life by which we must be governed, as
certainly as an engineer must obey the laws of mechanics if he wants
to build a bridge, that will stand, as certainly as a musician must
obey the laws of harmony if he would write good music, as surely as
a painter must obey the laws of perspective and of color if he
wishes to illuminate Nature by means of his art.

No matter what our work in life, whether scientific, artistic, or
domestic, it is the same body through which the power is
transmitted; and the same freedom in the conductors for impression
and expression is needed, to whatever end the power may be moved,
from the most simple action to the highest scientific or artistic
attainment.

The quality of power differs greatly; the results are widely
different, but the laws of transmission are the same. So wonderful
is the unity of life and its laws!

THE END.









End of Project Gutenberg's Power Through Repose, by Annie Payson Call

##############################################################################
## THE POWER OF CONCENTRATION — Theron Q. Dumont / W.W. Atkinson (1918) — attention training and visualization drills, exercise formats
##############################################################################

Project Gutenberg Etext of The Power of Concentration, by Dumont


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.
Project Gutenberg surfs with a modem donated by Supra.


The Power of Concentration

by Theron Q. Dumont

December, 1998  [Etext #1570]


Project Gutenberg Etext of The Power of Concentration, by Dumont
******This file should be named 1570.txt or 1570.zip******


Scanned by Charles Keller with OmniPage Professional OCR software

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we do NOT keep these books
in compliance with any particular paper edition, usually otherwise.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1998 for a total of 1500+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 150 billion Etexts given away.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*









The Power of Concentration, by Theron Q. Dumont

Scanned by Charles Keller with OmniPage Professional OCR software

The Power of Concentration


By THERON Q. DUMONT
Author of "Personal Magnetism"; "Practical Memory
Training"; "Mental Therapeutics"; "Successful
Salesmanship"; "Master Mind"; etc., etc.




TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. It is of the utmost value to learn how to
concentrate. To make the greatest success of anything you must be
able to concentrate your entire thought upon the idea you are
working on. The person that is able to concentrate utilizes all
constructive thoughts and shuts out all destructive ones. The
greatest man would accomplish nothing if he lacked concentration.

LESSON 1. CONCENTRATION FINDS THE WAY. Our two natures; one wants
to advance; the other wants to pull us back. The one we
concentrate on and develop determines what we will become. How
you may change your whole career and accomplish miracles. We can
be completely controlled by our concentrated thought. How can you
make an "opportunity". One man's opportunity is usually another
man's loss. A very beneficial practice. Why we get back what we
give out. A wonderful encouraging tonic. Every man that is
willing to put forth the necessary effort can be a success. The
man that is best prepared to do things. How to make your services
always in demand. How to reach the top. The man selected to
manage is not usually a genius. He does not possess any more
talent than others. What he does possess that others do not. Why
a few succeed and so many fail.

LESSON 2. THE SELF-MASTERY. SELF-DIRECTION POWER OF
CONCENTRATION. Very few men possess the power to concentrate as
they should. The cause of poor concentration. A very good
practice. Concentration means strength of mind. The person unable
to concentrate never accomplished a great deal. How many weaken
their powers of concentration. How concentration can only be
developed. How to control your every thought, wish and plan. What
concentration is. The person that is able to concentrate gains
the Power to control others. Concentration makes the will and
intellect act in unison. Why some people are not magnetic. When a
powerful personal influence is generated. How to become
influential. The cause of spasmodic, erratic concentration. How
to centralize your attention. A quick way to develop
concentration. The development of physical and mental
concentration. How to learn a valuable lesson. One of the best
ways to influence another. A good exercise. The real benefit of
physical culture usually lost sight of. How to hold the
facilities at work.

LESSON 3. HOW TO GAIN WHAT YOU WANT THROUGH CONCENTRATION. The
mistake made by those that do not understand the power of mental
attraction. How to get what you want. We are not living in a
"fairy age." Not the age for a "dreamer." The secret of getting
what you concentrate on. How a messenger in a bank became its
president. "Power to him who power exerts."

LESSON 4. CONCENTRATION, THE SILENT FORCE THAT PRODUCES RESULTS
IN ALL BUSINESS. The power of thought. An experiment showing the
power of thought. By concentrated thought you can make yourself
what you please. How to greatly increase your efficiency. The
face reflects how a person has spent his life. How to awaken
possibilities within, you never dreamed of. How to inspire
confidence in those you deal with. The value of concentrating
your thoughts in the proper channels. How to attract the good
things without a, great effort. By concentration you can
revolutionize your life and gain happiness greater than you can
imagine.

LESSON 5. HOW CONCENTRATED THOUGHT LINKS ALL HUMANITY TOGETHER.
How you may become successful. The barriers to success can be
controlled. How to realize your fondest ambitions. How to
overcome destructive forces. How to become the master of
circumstances. Through concentration you can mold your
environment. You can get what you want. Sowing the thought seeds
of success. Mind forces that are hardly dreamed of at present. A
method for removing unfavorable conditions. Concentration makes
you happy and gives you plenty to do.

LESSON 6. THE TRAINING OF THE WILL TO DO. The great secret of any
accomplishment. Everything Is possible today. The inner energy
that controls all conscious acts. How you can become a genius. A
mighty force at your disposal. Rules that will make you a "man"
among men. The spirit that wins. Concentration develops
determination and perseverance. Some special instructions. What
will power is. You have as strong a will as anyone. You determine
your own fate. The importance of learning to use your will.

LESSON 7. THE CONCENTRATED MENTAL DEMAND. The attitude of the
mind affects the expression of the face. The wonderful power of
the concentrated mental demand. How to desire something and
exclude all distracting thoughts. The silent force of wonderful
power within all of us. How to make plans work out. The mightiest
power in the world is free for you to use. The motive power which
supplies the energies necessary for achievement.

LESSON 8. CONCENTRATION GIVES MENTAL POISE. The man that can
concentrate is well poised. What you must do to be successful
today. Concentration that is dangerous. How to make those you
come in contact with feel as you do. The man that becomes a power
in the world. You can control your life and actions. Successful
lives are the concentrated lives. Why people do not get what they
"concentrate" on.

LESSON 9. CONCENTRATION CAN OVERCOME BAD HABITS. Habit is but a
powerful enemy and wonderful ally of concentration. Most people
are controlled through the power of habit. Most people are
imitators and copiers of their past selves. All physical
impressions are the carrying out of the actions of the will and
intellect. How everyone could be made happier and successful.
Some wonderful maxims. Habit the deepest law of human nature. How
to overcome undesirable habits. Some special instructions by Dr.
Oppenheim.

LESSON 10. BUSINESS RESULTS GAINED THROUGH CONCENTRATION. A
successful business not the result of chance. Failure not caused
by luck. The intense desire that is necessary to make a business
a success. Those that achieve permanent success deserve it. The
man that is able to skilfully manage his business. How to realize
your ambition. The successful business attitude. Your opinion
should be as good as any one else. How many ruin their judgment.
The man that gets the best results. A successful business not
hard to build up; may be built up In a few years now whereas
formerly it took a lifetime. How to do more and better work. How
to attract the ideas thought out by others. Many attract forces
and Influences that they should not. Broaden the visions of those
you come in contact with.

LESSON 11. CONCENTRATE ON COURAGE. Lack of courage creates
financial, as well as mental and moral difficulties. The man
without courage attracts all that is contemptible, weakening,
demoralizing and destructive. It is just as easy to be courageous
as cowardly. Courage concentrates the mental forces on the task
at hand. Cowardice dissipates both mental and moral forces. How
to banish doubts. No one knows what they can do until they try.
Once you understand the law everything is possible. How to build
up courage to do as you wish. Difficulties soon melt away before
the courageous.

LESSON 12. CONCENTRATE ON WEALTH. No one was intended to be poor.
Through wealth we can uplift ourselves and humanity. Uncongenial
and unpleasant conditions are not conducive to proper thought.
First step toward acquiring wealth. Most men of all ages have
been comparatively rich. Wealth not altogether the result of
being industrious. No one can become wealthy from his earnings.
Why some have to be taught such painful lessons. How many attract
poverty instead of riches. Why it is necessary to give a fair
exchange for what we receive. How to make your society not only
agreeable to others but sought after.

LESSON 13. YOU CAN CONCENTRATE, BUT WILL YOU? All have the
ability to concentrate. More ability not used than is used.
Sometimes only a trifle keeps one from becoming a success. The
fault is all your own. How to discover the cause if you are not
making good. Make conditions favorable and do not expect them to
shape themselves. Stumbling blocks but stepping stones. Hard
Passages can be bridged if you just concentrate on them. Why more
people do not succeed. Don't be afraid of a rebuff. The man that
knows no such thing as failure. Be ready for an opportunity when
it comes, No circumstances can keep the determined man from
succeeding.

LESSON 14. ART OF CONCENTRATING WITH PRACTICAL EXERCISE. A daily
habit will wonderfully increase your concentration. Seeing
yourself as you would like to be. Instruction of the greatest
importance. The great creative spirit of the universe. Why things
manifest as they do. The cosmic intelligence. A most desired
state. How to receive messages from the universal mind. How to
develop power, unknown to you before. Make your mind a powerful
transmitter of thought. The best time to practice concentration
exercises. How to rejuvenate every cell of your brain and body.
An exercise that will give you a self-poised manner. Instead of a
nervous strained appearance. Concentrating on the powers within.
Concentration will save your energy. How to keep from getting
irritable or nervous. The Eastern way of concentrating. Exercise
in controlling desires.

LESSON 15. CONCENTRATE SO YOU WILL NOT FORGET. Why people forget.
An easy way to remember. How to deepen your impression. Exercise
in Memory Concentration.

LESSON 16. HOW CONCENTRATION CAN FULFILL YOUR DESIRE. The desire
to do implies the ability to do. Man has within him the power to
gratify his every wish. If you have been unable to satisfy your
longings, it is time you learn how to use your God-given powers.
Priceless knowledge and unlimited possibilities within you that
Is foreign to most people. How to concentrate on what you want
and get it. The miraculous help we apparently receive at times.
How one man started a business on thirteen cents and in six years
built up a business that pays him $6,000 a year. When you put
forth the necessary concentrated effort you will receive great
help from unknown sources.

LESSON 17. IDEALS DEVELOP BY CONCENTRATION. Your happiness and
success depends upon your ideals. A valuable lesson. Through
concentration we can work out our ideals In physical life. What a
different world this would be if we would build the right kind of
ideals. Every time you change your ideal you think differently.
Life is one continuous unfoldment. You can be happy every step of
its way or miserable as you please. How our grandest thoughts
come to us.

LESSON 18. MENTAL CONTROL THROUGH CREATION. An inventor's vision.
Why It is easy to project your thoughts to another. How your
mental powers can draw to you forces of a helpful nature. The big
business man must possess mental power of control. How to make a
friend or relative succeed. How to generate enthusiasm and the
spirit of success. Your environment is either helpful or harmful.
Mental starvation. How to instil your thoughts and ideas into
others. Influence that must be shaken off before you can advance.
Our attitude has more to do with success than you realize.

LESSON 19. A CONCENTRATED WILL DEVELOPMENT. A most effective and
practical method of developing the Will. Practical exercises.
Will training without exercises. Will-power can overcome big
obstacles. The Will to win. Man an unknown quality until his
powers are developed. Ability plentiful, but organizing,
initiative and creative power not so plentiful. The driving force
within.

LESSON 20. CONCENTRATION REVIEWED. Those unable to concentrate
will generally suffer from poverty and unhappiness, The best
instructor will only help you to the extent you put it into
practice. Gaining the mastery of your work, life powers and
forces. Concentrate the dominant quality that makes men
successful. Everyone can learn to concentrate better. An
experiment to try. Final instructions.



INTRODUCTORY


We all know that in order to accomplish a certain thing we must
concentrate. It is of the utmost value to learn how to
concentrate. To make a success of anything you must be able to
concentrate your entire thought upon the idea you are working
out.

Do not become discouraged, if you are unable to hold your thought
on the subject very long at first. There are very few that can.
It seems a peculiar fact that it is easier to concentrate on
something that is not good for us, than on something that is
beneficial. This tendency is overcome when we learn to
concentrate consciously.

If you will just practice a few concentration exercises each day
you will find you will soon develop this wonderful power.

Success is assured when you are able to concentrate for you are
then able to utilize for your good all constructive thoughts and
shut out all the destructive ones. It is of the greatest value to
be able to think only that which will be beneficial.

Did you ever stop to think what an important part your thoughts,
concentrated thoughts, play in your life? This book shows their
far-reaching and all-abiding effects.

These lessons you will find very practical. The exercises I have
thoroughly tested. They are arranged so that you will notice an
improvement from the very start, and this will give you
encouragement. They point out ways in which you can help
yourself.

Man is a wonderful creature, but he must be trained and developed
to be useful. A great work can be accomplished by every man if he
can be awakened to do his very best. But the greatest man would
not accomplish much if he lacked concentration and effort. Dwarfs
can often do the work of giants when they are transformed by the
almost magic power of great mental concentration. But giants will
only do the work of dwarfs when they lack this power.

We accomplish more by concentration than by fitness; the man that
is apparently best suited for a place does not always fill it
best. It is the man that concentrates on its every possibility
that makes an art of both his work and his life.

All your real advancement must come from your individual effort.

This course of lessons will stimulate and inspire you to achieve
success; it will bring you into perfect harmony with the laws of
success. It will give you a firmer hold on your duties and
responsibilities.

The methods of thought concentration given in this work if put
into practice will open up interior avenues that will connect you
with the everlasting laws of Being and their exhaustless
foundation of unchangeable truth.

As most people are very different it is impossible to give
instructions that will be of the same value to all. The author
has endeavored in these lessons to awaken that within the soul
which perhaps the book does not express. So study these lessons
as a means of awakening and training that which is within
yourself. Let all your acts and thoughts have the intensity and
power of concentration.

To really get the full benefit of these lessons you should read a
page, then close the book and thoughtfully recall its ideas. If
you will do this you will soon cultivate a concentrated mental
habit, which will enable you to read with ordinary rapidity and
remember all that you read.



LESSON I. CONCENTRATION FINDS THE WAY

Everyone has two natures. One wants us to advance and the other
wants to pull us back. The one that we cultivate and concentrate
on decides what we are at the end. Both natures are trying to
gain control. The will alone decides the issue. A man by one
supreme effort of the will may change his whole career and almost
accomplish miracles. You may be that man. You can be if you Will
to be, for Will can find a way or make one.

I could easily fill a book, of cases where men plodding along in
a matter-of-fact way, were all at once aroused and as if
awakening from a slumber they developed the possibilities within
them and from that time on were different persons. You alone can
decide when the turning point will come. It is a matter of choice
whether we allow our diviner self to control us or whether we
will be controlled by the brute within us. No man has to do
anything he does not want to do. He is therefore the director of
his life if he wills to be. What we are to do, is the result of
our training. We are like putty, and can be completely controlled
by our will power.

Habit is a matter of acquirement. You hear people say: "He comes
by this or that naturally, a chip off the old block," meaning
that he is only doing what his parents did. This is quite often
the case, but there is no reason for it, for a person can break a
habit just the moment he masters the "I will." A man may have
been a "good-for-nothing" all his life up to this very minute,
but from this time on he begins to amount to something. Even old
men have suddenly changed and accomplished wonders. "I lost my
opportunity," says one. That may be true, but by sheer force of
will, we can find a way to bring us another opportunity. There is
no truth in the saying that opportunity knocks at our door but
once in a lifetime. The fact is, opportunity never seeks us; we
must seek it. What usually turns out to be one man's opportunity,
was another man's loss. In this day one man's brain is matched
against another's. It is often the quickness of brain action that
determines the result. One man thinks "I will do it," but while
he procrastinates the other goes ahead and does the work. They
both have the same opportunity. The one will complain of his lost
chance. But it should teach him a lesson, and it will, if he is
seeking the path that leads to success.

Many persons read good books, but say they do not get much good
out of them. They do not realize that all any book or any lesson
course can do is to awaken them to their possibilities; to
stimulate them to use their will power. You may teach a person
from now until doom's day, but that person will only know what he
learns himself. "You can lead him to the fountain, but you can't
make him drink."

One of the most beneficial practices I know of is that of looking
for the good in everyone and everything, for there is good in all
things. We encourage a person by seeing his good qualities and we
also help ourselves by looking for them. We gain their good
wishes, a most valuable asset sometimes. We get back what we give
out. The time comes when most all of us need encouragement; need
buoying up. So form the habit of encouraging others, and you will
find it a wonderful tonic for both those encouraged and yourself,
for you will get back encouraging and uplifting thoughts.

Life furnishes us the opportunity to improve. But whether we do
it or not depends upon how near we live up to what is expected of
us. The first of each month, a person should sit down and examine
the progress he has made. If he has not come up to "expectations"
he should discover the reason, and by extra exertion measure up
to what is demanded next time. Every time that we fall behind
what we planned to do, we lose just so much for that time is gone
forever. We may find a reason for doing it, but most excuses are
poor substitutes for action. Most things are possible. Ours may
be a hard task, but the harder the task, the greater the reward.
It is the difficult things that really develop us, anything that
requires only a small effort, utilizes very few of our faculties,
and yields a scanty harvest of achievement. So do not shrink from
a hard task, for to accomplish one of these will often bring us
more good than a dozen lesser triumphs.

I know that every man that is willing to pay the price can be a
success. The price is not in money, but in effort. The first
essential quality for success is the desire to do--to be
something. The next thing is to learn how to do it; the next to
carry it into execution. The man that is the best able to
accomplish anything is the one with a broad mind; the man that
has acquired knowledge, that may, it is true, be foreign to this
particular case, but is, nevertheless, of some value in all
cases. So the man that wants to be successful must be liberal; he
must acquire all the knowledge that he can; he must be well
posted not only in one branch of his business but in every part
of it. Such a man achieves success.

The secret of success is to try always to improve yourself no
matter where you are or what your position. Learn all you can.
Don't see how little you can do, but how much you can do. Such a
man will always be in demand, for he establishes the reputation
of being a hustler. There is always room for him because
progressive firms never let a hustler leave their employment if
they can help it.

The man that reaches the top is the gritty, plucky, hard worker
and never the timid, uncertain, slow worker. An untried man is
seldom put in a position of responsibility and power. The man
selected is one that has done something, achieved results in some
line, or taken the lead in his department. He is placed there
because of his reputation of putting vigor and virility into his
efforts, and because he has previously shown that he has pluck
and determination.

The man that is chosen at the crucial time is not usually a
genius; he does not possess any more talent than others, but he
has learned that results can only be produced by untiring
concentrated effort. That "miracles," in business do not just
"happen." He knows that the only way they will happen is by
sticking to a proposition and seeing it through. That is the only
secret of why some succeed and others fail. The successful man
gets used to seeing things accomplished and always feels sure of
success. The man that is a failure gets used to seeing failure,
expects it and attracts it to him.

It is my opinion that with the right kind of training every man
could be a success. It is really a shame that so many men and
women, rich in ability and talent, are allowed to go to waste, so
to speak. Some day I hope to see a millionaire philanthropist
start a school for the training of failures. I am sure he could
not put his money to a better use. In a year's time the science
of practical psychology could do wonders for him. He could have
agencies on the lookout for men that had lost their grip on
themselves; that had through indisposition weakened their will;
that through some sorrow or misfortune had become discouraged. At
first all they need is a little help to get them back on their
feet, but usually they get a knock downwards instead. The result
is that their latent powers never develop and both they and the
world are the losers. I trust that in the near future, someone
will heed the opportunity of using some of his millions in
arousing men that have begun to falter. All they need to be shown
is that there is within them an omnipotent source that is ready
to aid them, providing they will make use of it. Their minds only
have to be turned from despair to hope to make them regain their
hold.

When a man loses his grip today, he must win his redemption by
his own will. He will get little encouragement or advice of an
inspiring nature. He must usually regain the right road alone. He
must stop dissipating his energies and turn his attention to
building a useful career. Today we must conquer our weakening
tendencies alone. Don't expect anyone to help you. Just take one
big brace, make firm resolutions, and resolve to conquer your
weaknesses and vices. Really none can do this for you. They can
encourage you; that is all.

I can think of nothing, but lack of health, that should interfere
with one becoming successful. There is no other handicap that you
should not be able to overcome. To overcome a handicap, all that
it is necessary to do is to use more determination and grit and
will.

The man with grit and will, may be poor today and wealthy in a
few years; will power is a better asset than money; Will will
carry you over chasms of failure, if you but give it the chance.

The men that have risen to the highest positions have usually had
to gain their victories against big odds. Think of the hardships
many of our inventors have gone through before they became a
success. Usually they have been very much misunderstood by
relatives and friends. Very often they did not have the bare
necessities of life, yet, by sheer determination and resolute
courage, they managed to exist somehow until they perfected their
inventions, which afterwards greatly helped in bettering the
condition of others.

Everyone really wants to do something, but there are few that
will put forward the needed effort to make the necessary
sacrifice to secure it. There is only one way to accomplish
anything and that is to go ahead and do it. A man may accomplish
almost anything today, if he just sets his heart on doing it and
lets nothing interfere with his progress. Obstacles are quickly
overcome by the man that sets out to accomplish his heart's
desire. The "bigger" the man, the smaller the obstacle appears.
The "smaller" the man the greater the obstacle appears. Always
look at the advantage you gain by overcoming obstacles, and it
will give you the needed courage for their conquest.

Do not expect that you will always have easy sailing. Parts of
your journey are likely to be rough. Don't let the rough places
put you out of commission. Keep on with the journey. Just the way
you weather the storm shows what material you are made of. Never
sit down and complain of the rough places, but think how nice the
pleasant stretches were. View with delight the smooth plains that
are in front of you.

Do not let a setback stop you. Think of it as a mere incident
that has to be overcome before you can reach your goal.



LESSON II.  THE SELF-MASTERY: SELF-DIRECTION POWER OF
CONCENTRATION

Man from a psychological standpoint of development is not what he
should be. He does not possess the self-mastery, the
self-directing power of concentration that is his by right.

He has not trained himself in a way to promote his self-mastery.
Every balanced mind possesses the faculties whose chief duties
are to engineer, direct and concentrate the operations of the
mind, both in a mental and physical sense. Man must learn to
control not only his mind but his bodily movements.

When the controlling faculties (autonomic) are in an untrained
condition, the impulses, passions, emotions, thoughts, actions
and habits of the person suffer from lack of regulation, and the
procedure of mental concentration is not good, not because the
mind is necessarily weak in the autonomic department of the
faculties, but because the mind is not properly trained.

When the self-regulating faculties are not developed the
impulses, appetites, emotions and passions have full swing to do
as they please and the mind becomes impulsive, restless,
emotional and irregular in its action. This is what makes mental
concentration poor.

When the self-guiding faculties are weak in development, the
person always lacks the power of mental concentration. Therefore
you cannot learn to concentrate until you develop those very
powers that qualify you to be able to concentrate. So if you
cannot concentrate one of the following is the cause:

1. "Deficiency of the motor centers."
2. "An impulsive and emotional mind."
3. "An untrained mind."

The last fault can soon be removed by systematic practice. It is
easiest to correct.

The impulsive and emotional state of mind can best be corrected
by restraining anger, passion and excitement, hatred, strong
impulses, intense emotions, fretfulness, etc. It is impossible to
concentrate when you are in any of these excited states.

These can be naturally decreased by avoiding such food and drinks
as have nerve weakening or stimulating influences, or a tendency
to stir up the passions, the impulses and the emotions; it is a
very good practice to watch and associate with those persons that
are steady, calm, controlled and conservative.

Correcting the deficiency of the motor centers is harder because
as the person's brain is undeveloped he lacks will power.

To cure this takes some time. Persons so afflicted may benefit by
reading and studying my course, "The Master Mind."[*]


[*] To be published by Advanced Thought Publishing Co., Chicago,
Ill.


Many have the idea that when they get into a negative state they
are concentrating, but this is not so. They may be meditating,
though not concentrating. Those that are in a negative state a
good deal of the time cannot, as a rule, concentrate very well;
they develop instead abstraction of the mind, or absence of mind.
Their power of concentration becomes weaker and they find it
difficult to concentrate on anything. They very often injure the
brain, if they keep up this state. To be able to concentrate you
must possess strength of mind. The person that is feeble-minded
cannot concentrate his mind, because of lack of will. The mind
that cannot center itself on a special subject, or thought, is
weak; also the mind that cannot draw itself from a subject or
thought is weak. But the person that can center his mind on any
problem, no matter what it is, and remove any unharmonious
impressions has strength of mind. Concentration, first, last and
all the time, means strength of mind.

Through concentration a person is able to collect and hold his
mental and physical energies at work. A concentrated mind pays
attention to thoughts, words, acts and plans. The person who
allows his mind to roam at will will never accomplish a great
deal in the world. He wastes his energies. If you work, think,
talk and act aimlessly, and allow your brain to wander from your
subject to foreign fields, you will not be able to concentrate.
You concentrate at the moment when you say, "I want to, I can, I
will."

Some Mistakes Some People Make. If you waste your time reading
sensational stories or worthless newspaper items, you excite the
impulsive and the emotional faculties, and this means you are
weakening your power of concentration. You will not be a free
engineer, able to pilot yourself to success.

Concentration of the mind can only be developed by watching
yourself closely. All kinds of development commence with close
attention. You should regulate your every thought and feeling.
When you commence to watch yourself and your own acts and also
the acts of other people, you use the faculties of autonomy, and,
as you continue to do so, you improve your faculties, until in
time you can engineer your every thought, wish and plan. To be
able to focalize the mind on the object at hand in a conscious
manner leads to concentration. Only the trained mind can
focalize. To hold a thought before it until all the faculties
shall have had time to consider that thought is concentration.

The person that cannot direct his thoughts, wishes, plans,
resolutions and studies cannot possibly succeed to the fullest
extent. The person that is impulsive one moment and calm the next
has not the proper control over himself. He is not a master of
his mind, nor of his thoughts, feelings and wishes. Such a person
cannot be a success. When he becomes irritated, he irritates
others and spoils all chances of any concerned doing their best.
But the person that can direct his energies and hold them at work
in a concentrated manner controls his every work and act, and
thereby gains power to control others. He can make his every move
serve a useful end and every thought a noble purpose.

In this day the man that gets excited and irritable should be
looked upon as an undesirable person. The person of good breeding
now speaks with slowness and deliberation. He is cultivating more
and more of a reposeful attitude. He is consciously attentive and
holds his mind to one thing at a time. He shuts out everything
else. When you are talking to anyone give him your sole and
undivided attention. Do not let your attention wander or be
diverted. Give no heed to anything else, but make your will and
intellect act in unison.

Start out in the morning and see how self-poised you can remain
all day. At times take an inventory of your actions during the
day and see if you have kept your determination. If not, see that
you do tomorrow. The more self-poised you are the better will
your concentration be. Never be in too much of a hurry; and,
remember, the more you improve your concentration, the greater
are your possibilities. Concentration means success, because you
are better able to govern yourself and centralize your mind; you
become more in earnest in what you do and this almost invariably
improves your chances for success.

When you are talking to a person have your own plans in mind.
Concentrate your strength upon the purpose you are talking about.
Watch his every move, but keep your own plans before you. Unless
you do, you will waste your energy and not accomplish as much as
you should.

I want you to watch the next person you see that has the
reputation of being a strong character, a man of force. Watch and
see what a perfect control he has over his body. Then I want you
to watch just an ordinary person. Notice how he moves his eyes,
arms, fingers; notice the useless expenditure of energy. These
movements all break down the vital cells and lessen the person's
power in vital and nerve directions. It is just as important for
you to conserve your nervous forces as it is the vital forces. As
an example we see an engine going along the track very smoothly.
Some one opens all the valves and the train stops. It is the same
with you. If you want to use your full amount of steam, you must
close your valves and direct your power of generating mental
steam toward one end. Center your mind on one purpose, one plan,
one transaction.

There is nothing that uses up nerve force so quickly as
excitement. This is why an irritable person is never magnetic; he
is never admired or loved; he does not develop those finer
qualities that a real gentleman possesses. Anger, sarcasm and
excitement weaken a person in this direction. The person that
allows himself to get excited will become nervous in time,
because he uses up his nerve forces and his vital energies. The
person that cannot control himself and keep from becoming excited
cannot concentrate.

When the mind can properly concentrate, all the energy of every
microscopic cell is directed into one channel and then there is a
powerful personal influence generated. Everyone possesses many
millions of little trembling cells, and each one of these has a
center where life and energy are stored up and generated. If this
energy is not wasted but conserved and controlled, this person is
influential, but when it is the opposite, he is not influential
or successful.

Just as it is impossible for a steam engine to run with all its
valves open, so is it impossible for you to waste your energy and
run at your top speed. Each neuron in the gray layers of the
brain is a psychic center of thought and action, each one is
pulsating an intelligent force of some kind, and when this force,
your thoughts and motions, are kept in cheek by a conservative,
systematic and concentrated mind, the result will be magnetism,
vitality and health. The muscles, bones, ligaments, feet, hands
and nerves, etc., are agents for carrying out the mandates of the
mind. The sole purpose of the volitional faculties is to move the
physical mechanism as the energy travels along the wires of
nerves and muscles. Just for that reason, if you throw a
voluntary control over these messages, impulses, thoughts,
emotions, physical movements and over these physical instruments
you develop your faculties of self-mastery and to the extent you
succeed here in proportion will you develop the power of
concentration.

Any exercise or work that excites the mind, stimulates the
senses, calls the emotions and appetites into action, confuses,
terrifies or emotionalizes, weakens the power of concentration.
This is why all kind of excitement is bad. This is the reason why
persons who drink strong drinks, who allow themselves to get into
fits of temper, who fight, who eat stimulating food, who sing and
dance and thus develop their emotions, who are sudden, vehement
and emotional, lack the power to concentrate. But those whose
actions are slower and directed by their intelligence develop
concentration. Sometimes dogmatic, wilful, excitable persons can
concentrate, but it is spasmodic, erratic concentration instead
of controlled and uniform concentration. Their energy works by
spells; sometimes they have plenty, other times very little; it
is easily excited; easily wasted. The best way to understand it
is to compare it with the discharge of a gun. If the gun goes off
when you want it to, it accomplishes the purpose, but if it goes
off before you are ready for it, you will not only waste
ammunition, but it is also likely to do some damage. That is just
what most persons do. They allow their energy to explode, thus
not only wasting it but endangering others. They waste their
power, their magnetism and so injure their chance of success.
Such persons are never well liked and never will be until they
gain control over themselves.

It will be necessary for them to practice many different kinds of
concentration exercises, and to keep them up for some time. They
must completely overcome their sudden, erratic thoughts, and
regulate their emotions and movements. They must from morning to
night train the mind to be steady, and direct and keep the
energies at work.

The lower area of the brain is the store house of the energy.
Most all persons have all the dynamic energy they need if they
would concentrate it. They have the machine, but they must also
have the engineer, or they will not go very far. The engineer is
the self-regulating, directing power. The person that does not
develop his engineering qualities will not accomplish much in
life. The good engineer controls his every act. All work assists
in development. By what you do you either advance or degenerate.
This is a good idea to keep always in mind. When you are
uncertain whether you should do something or not, just think
whether by doing it you will grow or deteriorate, and act
accordingly.

I am a firm believer in "work when you work, and play when you
play." When you give yourself up to pleasure you can develop
concentration by thinking of nothing else but pleasure; when your
mind dwells on love, think of nothing but this and you will find
you can develop a more intense love than you ever had before.
When you concentrate your mind on the "you" or real self, and its
wonderful possibilities, you develop concentration and a higher
opinion of yourself. By doing this systematically, you develop
much power, because you cannot be systematic without
concentrating on what you are doing. When you walk out into the
country and inhale the fresh air, studying vegetation, trees,
etc., you are concentrating. When you see that you are at your
place of business at a certain time each morning you are
developing steadiness of habit and becoming systematic. If you
form the habit of being on time one morning, a little late the
next, and still later the following one, you are not developing
concentration, but whenever you fix your mind on a certain
thought and hold your mind on it at successive intervals, you
develop concentration.

If you hold your mind on some chosen object, you centralize your
attention, just like the lens of the camera centralizes on a
certain landscape. Therefore always hold your mind on what you
are doing, no matter what it is. Keep a careful watch over
yourself, for unless you do your improvement will be very slow.

Practice inhaling long, deep breaths, not simply for the
improvement of health, although that is no small matter, but also
for the purpose of developing more power, more love, more life.
All work assists in development.

You may think it foolish to try to develop concentration by
taking muscular exercises, but you must not forget that the mind
is associated with muscle and nerve. When you steady your nerves
and muscles, you steady your mind, but let your nerves get out of
order and your mind will become erratic and you will not possess
the power of direction, which, in other words, is concentration.
Therefore you understand how important exercises that steady the
nerves and muscles are in developing concentration.

Everyone is continually receiving impulses that must be directed
and controlled if one is to lead a successful life. That is the
reason why a person must control the movements of his eyes, feet,
fingers, etc.; this is another reason why it is important to
control his breathing. The slow, deep, prolonged exhalations are
of wonderful value. They steady the circulation, the heart
action, muscles and nerves of the mind. If the heart flutters,
the circulation is not regular, and when the lung action is
uneven, the mind becomes unsteady and not fit for concentration.
This is why controlled breathing is very important as a
foundation for physical health.

You must not only concentrate your mind, but also the action of
the eyes, ears and fingers. Each of these contain miniature minds
that are controlled by the master engineer. You will develop much
quicker if you thoroughly realize this.

If you have ever associated with big men, or read their
biographies, you will find that they usually let the others do
the talking. It is much easier to talk than it is to listen.
There is no better exercise for concentration than to pay close
attention when some one is talking. Besides learning from what
they have to say, you may develop both mental and physical
concentration.

When you shake hands with some one just think of your hand as
containing hundreds of individual minds, each having an
intelligence of its own. When you put this feeling into your hand
shake it shows personality. When you shake hands in a listless
way, it denotes timidity, lack of force and power of personality.
When the hand grip is very weak and stiff, the person has little
love in his nature, no passion and no magnetism. When the hand
shake is just the opposite, you will find that the nature is
also. The loveless person is non-magnetic and he shows that he is
by his non-magnetic hand shake. When two developed souls shake
hands, their clasps are never light. There is a thrill that goes
through both when the two currents meet. Love arouses the
opposite currents of the positive and negative natures. When
there is no love, life loses its charm. The hand quickly shows
when love is being aroused. This is why you should study the art
of hand shaking and develop your social affections. A person that
loves his kind reflects love, but a person that hates reflects
hate. The person with a bad nature, a hateful disposition, evil
thoughts and feeling is erratic, freakish and fitful. When you
allow yourself to become irritable, watch how you breathe and you
will learn a valuable lesson. Watch how you breathe when you are
happy. Watch your breathing when you harbor hate. Watch how you
breathe when you feel in love with the whole world and noble
emotions thrill you. When filled with good thoughts, you breathe
a plentiful supply of oxygen into your lungs and love fills your
soul. Love develops a person, physically, mentally and socially.
Breathe deeply when you are happy and you will gain life and
strength; you will steady your mind and you will develop your
power of concentration and become magnetic and powerful.

If you want to get more out of life you must think more of love.
Unless you have real affection for something, you have no
sentiment, no sweetness, no magnetism. So arouse your love
affections by your will and enter into a fuller life.

The hand of love always magnetizes, but it must be steady and
controlled. Love can be concentrated in your hand shake, and this
is one of the best ways to influence another.

The next time you feel yourself becoming irritable, use your will
and be patient. This is a very good exercise in self-control. It
will help you to keep patient if you will breathe slowly and
deeply. If you find you are commencing to speak fast, just
control yourself and speak slowly and clearly. Keep from either
raising or lowering your voice and concentrate on the fact that
you are determined to keep your poise, and you will improve your
power of concentration.

When you meet people of some consequence, assume a reposeful
attitude before them. Do this at all times. Watch both them and
yourself. Static exercises develop the motor faculties and
increase the power of concentration. If you feel yourself getting
irritable, nervous or weak, stand squarely on your feet with your
chest up and inhale deeply and you will see that your
irritability will disappear and a silent calm will pass over you.

If you are in the habit of associating with nervous, irritable
people, quit it until you grow strong in the power of
concentration, because irritable, angry, fretful, dogmatic and
disagreeable people will weaken what powers of resistance you
have.

Any exercises that give you better control of the ears, fingers,
eyes, feet, help you to steady your mind; when your eye is
steady, your mind is steady. One of the best ways to study a
person is to watch his physical movements, for, when we study his
actions, we are studying his mind. Because actions are the
expressions of the mind. As the mind is, so is the action. If it
is uneasy, restless, erratic, unsteady, its actions are the same.
When it is composed, the mind is composed. Concentration means
control of the mind and body. You cannot secure control over one
without the other.

Many people who seem to lack ambition have sluggish minds. They
are steady, patient and seemingly have good control, but this
does not say they are able to concentrate. These people are
indolent, inactive, slow and listless, because they lack energy;
they do not lose control because they have little force to
control. They have no temper and it therefore cannot disturb
them. Their actions are steady because they possess little
energy. The natural person is internally strong, energetic and
forceful, but his energy, force and strength, thoughts and
physical movements are well under his control.

If a person does not have energy, both mental and physical, he
must develop it. If he has energy which he cannot direct and hold
to a point he must learn to do so. A man may be very capable,
but, unless he Wills to control his abilities, they will not do
him any good.

We hear so much talk about the benefit of physical culture, but
the real benefit of this is really lost sight of. There is
nothing that holds the faculties at work in a sustained and
continuous manner as static exercises do. For, as stated before,
when you learn to control the body, you are gaining control over
the mind.



LESSON III. HOW TO GAIN WHAT YOU WANT THROUGH CONCENTRATION

The ignorant person may say, "How can you get anything by merely
wanting it? I say that through concentration you can get anything
you want. Every desire can be gratified. But whether it is, will
depend upon you concentrating to have that desire fulfilled.
Merely wishing for something will not bring it. Wishing you had
something shows a weakness and not a belief that you will really
get it. So never merely wish, as we are not living in a "fairy
age." You use up just as much brain force in "vain imaginings" as
you do when you think of something worth while.

Be careful of your desires, make a mental picture of what you
want and set your will to this until it materializes. Never allow
yourself to drift without helm or rudder. Know what you want to
do, and strive with all your might to do it, and you will
succeed.

Feel that you can accomplish anything you undertake. Many
undertake to do things, but feel when they start they are going
to fail and usually they do. I will give an illustration. A man
goes to a store for an article. The clerk says, "I am sorry, we
have not it." But the man that is determined to get that thing
inquires if he doesn't know where he can get it. Again receiving
an unsatisfactory answer the determined buyer consults the
manager and finally he finds where the article can be bought.

That is the whole secret of concentrating on getting what you
want. And, remember, your soul is a center of all-power, and you
can accomplish what you will to. "I'll find a way or make one!"
is the spirit that wins. I know a man that is now head of a large
bank. He started there as a messenger boy. His father had a
button made for him with a "P" on it and put it on his coat. He
said, "Son, that 'P' is a reminder that some day you are to be
the president of your bank. I want you to keep this thought in
your mind. Every day do something that will put you nearer your
goal." Each night after supper he would say, "Son, what did you
do today?" In this way the thought was always kept in mind. He
concentrated on becoming president of that bank, and he did. His
father told him never to tell anyone what that "P" stood for. A
good deal of fun was made of it by his associates. And they tried
to find out what it stood for, but they never did until he was
made president and then he told the secret.

Don't waste your mental powers in wishes. Don't dissipate your
energies by trying to satisfy every whim. Concentrate on doing
something really worth while. The man that sticks to something is
not the man that fails.

"Power to him who power exerts."--Emerson.


Success to-day depends largely on concentrating on the Interior
law of force, for when you do this you awaken those thought
powers or forces, which, when used in business, insures permanent
results.

Until you are able to do this you have not reached your limit in
the use of your forces. This great universe is interwoven with
myriads of forces. You make your own place, and whether it is
important depends upon you. Through the Indestructible and
Unconquerable Law you can in time accomplish all right things and
therefore do not be afraid to undertake whatever you really
desire to accomplish and are willing to pay for in effort.
Anything that is right is possible. That which is necessary will
inevitably take place. If something is right it is your duty to
do it, though the whole world thinks it to be wrong. "God and one
are always a majority," or in plain words, that omnipotent
interior law which is God, and the organism that represents you
is able to conquer the whole world if your cause is absolutely
just. Don't say I wish I was a great man. You can do anything
that is proper and you want to do. Just say: You can. You will.
You must. Just realize this and the rest is easy. You have the
latent faculties and forces to subdue anything that tries to
interfere with your plans.

"Let-the-troubles-and-responsibilities-of-life-come-thick-and-fas
t. I-am-ready-for-them. My-soul-is-unconquerable.
I-represent-the-Infinite-law-of-force,-or-of-all-power.
This-God-within-is-my-all-sufficient-strength-and-ever-present-he
lp-in-time-of-trouble.
The-more-difficulties-the-greater-its-triumphs-through-me.
The-harder-my-trials,-the-faster-I-go-in-the-development-of-my-in
herent-strength. Let-all-else-fail-me.
This-interior-reliance-is-all-sufficient. The-right-must-prevail.
I-demand-wisdom-and-power-to-know-and-follow-the-right.
My-higher-self-is-all-wise. I-now-draw-nearer-to-it."



LESSON IV. CONCENTRATION, THE SILENT FORCE THAT PRODUCES RESULTS
IN ALL BUSINESS

I want you first to realize how powerful thought is. A thought of
fear has turned a person's hair gray in a night. A prisoner
condemned to die was told that if he would consent to an
experiment and lived through it he would be freed. He consented.
They wanted to see how much blood a person could lose and still
live. They arranged that blood would apparently drop from a cut
made in his leg. The cut made was very slight, from which
practically no blood escaped. The room was darkened, and the
prisoner thought the dropping he heard was really coming from his
leg. The next morning he was dead through mental fear.

The two above illustrations will give you a little idea of the
power of thought. To thoroughly realize the power of thought is
worth a great deal to you.

Through concentrated thought power you can make yourself whatever
you please. By thought you can greatly increase your efficiency
and strength. You are surrounded by all kinds of thoughts, some
good, others bad, and you are sure to absorb some of the latter
if you do not build up a positive mental attitude.

If you will study the needless moods of anxiety, worry,
despondency, discouragement and others that are the result of
uncontrolled thoughts, you will realize how important the control
of your thoughts are. Your thoughts make you what you are.

When I walk along the street and study the different people's
faces I can tell how they spent their lives. It all shows in
their faces, just like a mirror reflects their physical
countenances. In looking in those faces I cannot help thinking
how most of the people you see have wasted their lives.

The understanding of the power of thought will awaken
possibilities within you that you never dreamed of. Never forget
that your thoughts are making your environment, your friends, and
as your thoughts change these will also. Is this not a practical
lesson to learn? Good thoughts are constructive. Evil thoughts
are destructive. The desire to do right carries with it a great
power. I want you to thoroughly realize the importance of your
thoughts, and how to make them valuable, to understand that your
thoughts come to you over invisible wires and influence you.

If your thoughts are of a high nature, you become connected with
people of the same mental caliber and you are able to help
yourself. If your thoughts are tricky, you will bring tricky
people to deal with you, who will try to cheat you.

If your thoughts are right kind, you will inspire confidence in
those with whom you are dealing.

As you gain the good will of others your confidence and strength
will increase. You will soon learn the wonderful value of your
thoughts and how serene you can become even when circumstances
are the most trying.

Such thoughts of Right and Good Will bring you into harmony with
people that amount to something in the world and that are able to
give you help if you should need it, as nearly everyone does at
times.

You can now see why it is so important to concentrate your
thoughts in the proper channels. It is very necessary that people
should have confidence in you. When two people meet they have not
the time to look each other up. They accept each other according
to instinct which can usually be relied on.

You meet a person and his attitude creates a suspicion in you.
The chances are you cannot tell why, but something tells you,
"Have no dealings with him, for if you do, you will be sorry."
Thoughts produce actions. Therefore be careful of your thoughts.
Your life will be molded by the thoughts you have. A spiritual
power is always available to your thought, and when you are
worthy you can attract all the good things without a great effort
on your part.

The sun's rays shine down on our gardens, but we can plant trees
that will interfere with the sun light. There are invisible
forces ready to help you if you do not think and act to intercept
these. These forces work silently. "You reap what you sow."

You have concentrated within powers that if developed will bring
you happiness greater than you can even imagine. Most people go
rushing through life, literally driving away the very things they
seek. By concentration you can revolutionize your life,
accomplish infinitely more and without a great effort.

Look within yourself and you will find the greatest machine ever
made.

How to Speak Wisely. In order to speak wisely you must secure at
least a partial concentration of the faculties and forces upon
the subject at hand. Speech interferes with the focusing powers
of the mind, as it withdraws the attention to the external and
therefore is hardly to be compared with that deep silence of the
subconscious mind, where deep thoughts, and the silent forces of
high potency are evolved. It is necessary to be silent before you
can speak wisely. The person that is really alert and well poised
and able to speak wisely under trying circumstances, is the
person that has practiced in the silence. Most people do not know
what the silence is and think it is easy to go into the silence,
but this is not so. In the real silence we become attached to
that interior law and the forces become silent, because they are
in a state of high potency, or beyond the vibratory sounds to
which our external ears are attuned. He who desires to become
above the ordinary should open up for himself the interior
channels which lead to the absolute law of the omnipotent. You
can only do this by persistently and intelligently practicing
thought concentration. Hold the thought:

In-silence-I-will-allow-my-higher-self-to-have-complete-control.
I-will-be-true-to-my-higher-self.
I-will-live-true-to-my-conception-of-what-is-right.
I-realize-that-it-is-to-my-self-interest-to-live-up-to-my-best.
I-demand-wisdom-so that-I-may-act-wisely-for-myself-and-others.

In the next chapter I will tell you of the mysterious law, which
links all humanity together, by the powers of co-operative
thought, and chooses for us companionship and friends.



LESSON V. HOW CONCENTRATED THOUGHT LINKS ALL HUMANITY TOGETHER

It is within your power to gratify your every wish. Success is
the result of the way you think. I will show you how to think to
be successful.

The power to rule and attract success is within yourself. The
barriers that shut these off from you are subject to your
control. You have unlimited power to think and this is the link
that connects you with your omniscient source.

Success is the result of certain moods of mind or ways of
thinking. These moods can be controlled by you and produced at
will.

You have been evolved to what you are from a lowly atom because
you possessed the power to think. This power will never leave
you, but will keep urging you on until you reach perfection. As
you evolve, you create new desires and these can be gratified.
The power to rule lies within you. The barriers that keep you
from ruling are also within you. These are the barriers of
ignorance.

Concentrated thought will accomplish seemingly impossible results
and make you realize your fondest ambitions. At the same time
that you break down barriers of limitation new ambitions will be
awakened. You begin to experience conscious thought
constructions.

If you will just realize that through deep concentration you
become linked with thoughts of omnipotence, you will kill out
entirely your belief in your limitations and at the same time
will drive away all fear and other negative and destructive
thought forces which constantly work against you. In the place of
these you will build up a strong assurance that your every
venture will be successful. When you learn thus how to
concentrate and reinforce your thought, you control your mental
creations; they in turn help to mould your physical environment,
and you become the master of circumstances and the ruler of your
kingdom.

It is just as easy to surround your life with what you want as it
is with what you don't want. It is a question to be decided by
your will. There are no walls to prevent you from getting what
you want, providing you want what is right. If you choose
something that is not right, you are in opposition to the
omnipotent plans of the universe and deserve to fail. But, if you
will base your desires on justice and good will, you avail
yourself of the helpful powers of universal currents, and instead
of having a handicap to work against, can depend upon ultimate
success, though the outward appearances may not at first be
bright.

Never stop to think of temporary appearances, but maintain an
unfaltering belief in your ultimate success. Make your plans
carefully, and see that they are not contrary to the tides of
universal justice. The main thing for you to remember is to keep
at bay the destructive and opposing forces of fear and anger and
their satellites.

There is no power so great as the belief which comes from the
knowledge that your thought is in harmony with the divine laws of
thought and the sincere conviction that your cause is right. You
may be able seemingly to accomplish results for a time even if
your cause is unjust, but the results will be temporary, and, in
time, you will have to tear down your thought edifice and build
on the true foundation of Right.

Plans that are not built on truth produce discordant vibrations
and are therefore self-destructive. Never try to build until you
can build right. It is a waste of time to do anything else. You
may temporarily put aside your desire to do right, but its true
vibrations will interfere with your unjust plans until you are
forced back into righteous paths of power.

All just causes succeed in time, though temporarily they may
fail. So if you should face the time when everything seems
against you, quiet your fears, drive away all destructive
thoughts and uphold the dignity of your moral and spiritual life.

"Where There Is A Will There Is A Way." The reason this is so is
that the Will can make a way if given the chance to secure the
assistance of aiding forces. The more it is developed the higher
the way to which it will lead.

When everything looks gloomy and discouraging, then is the time
to show what you are made of by rejoicing that you can control
your moods by making them as calm, serene and bright as if
prosperity were yours.

"Be faithful in sowing the thought seeds of success, in perfect
trust that the sun will not cease to shine and bring a generous
harvest in one season."

It is not always necessary to think of the success of a venture
when you are actually engaged in it. For when the body is
inactive the mind is most free to catch new ideas that will
further the opportunity you are seeking. When you are actually
engaged in doing something, you are thinking in the channels you
have previously constructed and the work does not have to be done
over again.

When you are in a negative mood the intuitions are more active,
for you are not then controlling your thoughts by the will.
Everything we do. should have the approval of the intuition.

When you are in a negative mood you attract thoughts of similar
nature through the law of affinity. That is why it is so
important to form thoughts of a success nature to attract similar
ones. If you have never made a study of this subject, you may
think this is all foolishness, but it is a fact that there are
thought currents that unerringly bring thoughts of a similar
nature. Many persons who think of failure actually attract
failure by their worries, their anxieties, their overactivity.
These thoughts are bound to bring failure. When you once learn
the laws of thought and think of nothing but Good, Truth,
Success, you will make more progress with less effort than you
ever made before.

There are forces that can aid the mind that are hardly dreamed of
by the average person. When you learn to believe more in the
value of thought and its laws you will be led aright and your
business gains will multiply.

The following method may assist you in gaining better thought
control. If you are unable to control your fears, just say to
your faulty determination, "Do not falter or be afraid, for I am
not really alone. I am surrounded by invisible forces that will
assist me to remove the unfavorable appearances." Soon you will
have more courage. The only difference between the fearless man
and the fearful one is in his will, his hope. So if you lack
success, believe in it, hope for it, claim it. You can use the
same method to brace up your thoughts of desire, aspiration,
imagination, expectation, ambition, understanding, trust and
assurance.

If you get anxious, angry, discouraged, undecided or worried, it
is because you are not receiving the co-operation of the higher
powers of your mind. By your Will you can so organize the powers
of the mind that your moods change only as you want them to
instead of as circumstances affect you.

I was recently asked if I advised concentrating on what you eat,
or what you see while walking. My reply was that no matter what
you may be doing, when in practice think of nothing else but that
act at the time. The idea is to be able to control your
unimportant acts, otherwise you set up a habit that it will be
hard to overcome, because your faculties have not been in the
habit of concentrating. Your faculties cannot be disorganized one
minute and organized the next. If you allow the mind to wander
while you are doing small things, it will be likely to get into
mischief and make it hard to concentrate on the important act
when it comes.

The man that is able to concentrate is the happy, busy man. Time
does not drag with him. He always has plenty to do. He does not
have time to think over past mistakes, which would make him
unhappy.

If despite our discouragement and failures, we claim our great
heritage, "life and truth and force, like an electric current,"
will permeate our lives until we enter into our "birthright in
eternity."

The will does not act with clearness, decision and promptness
unless it is trained to do so. There are comparatively few that
really know what they are doing every minute of the day. This is
because they do not observe with sufficient orderliness and
accuracy to know what they are doing. It is not difficult to know
what you are doing all the time, if you will just practice
concentration and with a reposeful deliberation, and train
yourself to think clearly, promptly, and decisively. If you allow
yourself to worry or hurry in what you are doing, this will not
be clearly photographed upon the sensitized plate of the
subjective mind, and you therefore will not be really conscious
of your actions. So practice accuracy and concentration of
thought, and also absolute truthfulness and you will soon be able
to concentrate.



LESSON VI. THE TRAINING OF THE WILL TO DO

The Will To Do is the greatest power in the world that is
concerned with human accomplishment and no one can in advance
determine its limits.

The things that we do now would have been a few ages ago
impossibilities. Today the safe maxim is: "All things are
possible."

The Will To Do is a force that is strictly practical, yet it is
difficult to explain just what it is. It can be compared to
electricity because we know it only through its cause and
effects. It is a power we can direct and to just the extent we
direct it do we determine our future. Every time you accomplish
any definite act, consciously or unconsciously, you use the
principle of the Will. You can Will to do anything whether it is
right or wrong, and therefore the way you use your will makes a
big difference in your life.

Every person possesses some "Will To Do." It is the inner energy
which controls all conscious acts. What you will to do directs
your life forces. All habits, good or bad, are the result of what
you will to do. You improve or lower your condition in life by
what you will to do. Your will has a connection with all avenues
of knowledge, all activities, all accomplishment.

You probably know of cases where people have shown wonderful
strength under some excitement, similar to the following: The
house of a farmer's wife caught on fire. No one was around to
help her move anything. She was a frail woman, and ordinarily was
considered weak. On this occasion she removed things from the
house that it later took three men to handle. It was the "Will To
Do" that she used to accomplish her task.

Genius Is But A Will To Do Little Things With Infinite Pains.
Little Things Well Done Open The Door Of Opportunity For Bigger
Things.

The Will accomplishes its greater results through activities that
grow out of great concentration in acquiring the power of
voluntary attention to such an extent that we can direct it where
we will and hold it steadily to its task until our aim is
accomplished. When you learn so to use it, your Will Power
becomes a mighty force. Almost everything can be accomplished
through its proper use. It is greater than physical force because
it can be used to control not only physical but mental and moral
forces.

There are very few that possess perfectly developed and balanced
Will Power, but those who do easily crush out their weak
qualities. Study yourself carefully. Find out your greatest
weakness and then use your will power to overcome it. In this way
eradicate your faults, one by one, until you have built up a
strong character and personality.

Rules for Improvement. A desire arises. Now think whether this
would be good for you. If it is not, use your Will Power to kill
out the desire, but, on the other hand, if it is a righteous
desire, summon all your Will Power to your aid, crush all
obstacles that confront you and secure possession of the coveted
Good.

Slowness in Making Decisions. This is a weakness of Will Power.
You know you should do something, but you delay doing it through
lack of decision. It is easier not to do a certain thing than to
do it, but conscience says to do it. The vast majority of persons
are failures because of the lack of deciding to do a thing when
it should be done. Those that are successful have been quick to
grasp opportunities by making a quick decision. This power of
will can be used to bring culture, wealth and health.

Some Special Pointers. For the next week try to make quicker
decisions in your little daily affairs. Set the hour you wish to
get up and arise exactly at the fixed time. Anything that you
should accomplish, do on or ahead of time. You want, of course,
to give due deliberation to weighty matters, but by making quick
decisions on little things you will acquire the ability to make
quick decisions in bigger things. Never procrastinate. Decide
quickly one way or the other even at the risk of deciding wrong.
Practice this for a week or two and notice your improvement.

The Lack of Initiative. This, too, keeps many men from
succeeding. They have fallen into the way of imitating others in
all that they do. Very often we hear the expression, "He seems
clever enough, but he lacks initiative." Life for them is one
continuous grind. Day after day they go through the same
monotonous round of duties, while those that are "getting along"
are using their initiative to get greater fullness of life. There
is nothing so responsible for poverty as this lack of initiative,
this power to think and do for ourselves.

You Are as Good as Anyone. You have will power, and if you use
it, you will get your share of the luxuries of life. So use it to
claim your own. Don't depend on anyone else to help you. We have
to fight our own battles. All the world loves a fighter, while
the coward is despised by all.

Every person's problems are different, so I can only say "analyze
your opportunities and conditions and study your natural
abilities." Form plans for improvement and then put them into
operation. Now, as I said before, don't just say, "I am going to
do so and so," but carry your plan into execution. Don't make an
indefinite plan, but a definite one, and then don't give up until
your object has been accomplished. Put these suggestions into
practice with true earnestness, and you will soon note
astonishing results, and your whole life will be completely
changed. An excellent motto for one of pure motives is: Through
my will power I dare do what I want to. You will find this
affirmation has a very strengthening effect.

The Spirit of Perseverance. The spirit of "sticktoitiveness" is
the one that wins. Many go just so far and then give up, whereas,
if they had persevered a little longer, they would have won out.
Many have much initiative, but instead of concentrating it into
one channel, they diffuse it through several, thereby dissipating
it to such an extent that its effect is lost.

Develop more determination, which is only the Will To Do, and
when you start out to do something stick to it until you get
results. Of course, before starting anything you must look ahead
and see what the "finish leads to." You must select a road that
will lead to "somewhere," rather than "nowhere." The journey must
be productive of some kind of substantial results. The trouble
with so many young men is that they launch enterprises without
any end in sight. It is not so much the start as the finish of a
journey that counts. Each little move should bring you nearer the
goal which you planned to reach before the enterprise began.

Lack of Perseverance is nothing but the lack of the Will To Do.
It takes the same energy to say, "I will continue," as to say, "I
give up." Just the moment you say the latter you shut off your
dynamo, and your determination is gone. Every time you allow your
determination to be broken you weaken it. Don't forget this. Just
the instant you notice your determination beginning to weaken,
concentrate on it and by sheer Will Power make it continue on the
"job."

Never try to make a decision when you are not in a calm state of
mind. If in a "quick temper," you are likely to say things you
afterwards regret. In anger, you follow impulse rather than
reason. No one can expect to achieve success if he makes
decisions when not in full control of his mental forces.

Therefore make it a fixed rule to make decisions only when at
your best. If you have a "quick temper," you can quickly gain
control over it by simple rule of counting backwards. To count
backwards requires concentration, and you thus quickly regain a
calm state. In this way you can break the "temper habit."

It will do you a lot of good to think over what you said and
thought the last time you were angry. Persevere until you see
yourself as others see you. It would do no harm to write the
scene out in story form and then sit in judgment of the character
that played your part.

Special Instructions to Develop the Will To Do. This is a form of
mental energy, but requires the proper mental attitude to make it
manifest. We hear of people having wonderful will power, which
really is wrong. It should be said that they use their will power
while with many it is a latent force. I want you to realize that
no one has a monopoly on will power. There is plenty for all.
What we speak of as will power is but the gathering together of
mental energy, the concentration power at one point. So never
think of that person as having a stronger will than yours. Each
person will be supplied with just that amount of will power that
he demands. You don't have to develop will power if you
constantly make use of all you have, and remember the way in
which you use it determines your fate, for your life is moulded
to great extent by the use you make of your will. Unless you make
proper use of it you have neither independence nor firmness. You
are unable to control yourself and become a mere machine for
others to use. It is more important to learn to use your will
than to develop your intellect. The man that has not learned how
to use his will rarely decides things for himself, but allows his
resolutions to be changed by others. He fluctuates from one
opinion to another, and of course does not accomplish anything
out of the ordinary, while his brother with the trained will
takes his place among the world's leaders.



LESSON VII. THE CONCENTRATED MENTAL DEMAND

The Mental Demand is the potent force in achievement. The
attitude of the mind affects the expression of the face,
determines action, changes our physical condition and regulates
our lives.

I will not here attempt to explain the silent force that achieves
results. You want to develop your mental powers so you can effect
the thing sought, and that is what I want to teach you. There is
wonderful power and possibility in the concentrated Mental
Demand. This, like all other forces, is controlled by laws. It
can, like all other forces, be wonderfully increased by
consecutive, systematized effort.

The mental demand must be directed by every power of the mind and
every possible element should be used to make the demand
materialize. You can so intently desire a thing that you can
exclude all distracting thoughts. When you practice this
singleness of concentration until you attain the end sought, you
have developed a Will capable of accomplishing whatever you wish.

As long as you can only do the ordinary things you will be
counted in the mass of mediocrity. But just as quick as you
surpass others by even comparatively small measure, you are
classed as one of life's successes. So, if you wish to emerge
into prominence, you must accomplish something more than the
ordinary man or woman. It is easy to do this if you will but
concentrate on what you desire, and put forth your best effort.
It is not the runner with the longest legs or the strongest
muscles that wins the race, but the one that can put forth the
greatest desire force. You can best understand this by thinking
of an engine. The engine starts up slowly, the engineer gradually
extending the throttle to the top notch. It is then keyed up to
its maximum speed. The same is true of two runners. They start
off together and gradually they increase their desire to go
faster. The one that has the greatest intensity of desire will
win. He may outdistance the other by only a fraction of an inch,
yet he gets the laurels.

The men that are looked upon as the world's successes have not
always been men of great physical power, nor at the start did
they seem very well adapted to the conditions which encompassed
them. In the beginning they were not considered men of superior
genius, but they won their success by their resolution to achieve
results in their undertakings by permitting no set-back to
dishearten them; no difficulties to daunt them. Nothing could
turn them or influence them against their determination. They
never lost sight of their goal. In all of us there is this silent
force of wonderful power. If developed, it can overcome
conditions that would seem insurmountable. It is constantly
urging us on to greater achievement. The more we become
acquainted with it the better strategists we become, the more
courage we develop and the greater the desire within us for
self-expression in activity along many lines.

No one will ever be a failure if he becomes conscious of this
silent force within that controls his destiny. But without the
consciousness of this inner force, you will not have a clear
vision, and external conditions will not yield to the power of
your mind. It is the mental resolve that makes achievement
possible. Once this has been formed it should never be allowed to
cease to press its claim until its object is attained. To make
plans work out it will, at times, be necessary to use every power
of your mind. Patience, perseverance and all the indomitable
forces within one will have to be mustered and used with the
greatest effectiveness.

Perseverance is the first element of success. In order to
persevere you must be ceaseless in your application. It requires
you to concentrate your thoughts upon your undertaking and bring
every energy to bear upon keeping them focused upon it until you
have accomplished your aim. To quit short of this is to weaken
all future efforts.

The Mental Demand seems an unreal power because it is intangible;
but it is the mightiest power in the world. It is a power that is
free for you to use. No one can use it for you. The Mental Demand
is not a visionary one. It is a potent force, which you can use
freely without cost. When you are in doubt it will counsel you.
It will guide you when you are uncertain. When you are in fear it
will give you courage. It is the motive power which supplies the
energies necessary to the achievement of the purpose. You have a
large store house of possibilities. The Mental Demand makes
possibilities realities. It supplies everything necessary for the
accomplishment, it selects the tools and instructs how to use
them. It makes you understand the situation. Every time you make
a Mental Demand you strengthen the brain centers by drawing to
you external forces.

Few realize the power of a Mental Demand. It is possible to make
your demand so strong that you can impart what you have to say to
another without speaking to him. Have you ever, after planning to
discuss a certain matter with a friend, had the experience of
having him broach the subject before you had a chance to speak of
it? Have you ever, in a letter, made a suggestion to a friend
that he carried out before your letter reached him? Have you ever
wanted to speak to a person who, just then walked in or
telephoned. I have had many such responses to thought and you and
your friends have doubtless experienced them, too.

These two things are neither coincidences nor accidents, but are
the results of mental demand launched by strong concentration.

The person that never wants anything gets little. To demand
resolutely is the first step toward getting what you want.

The power of the Mental Demand seems absolute, the supply
illimitable. The mental demand projects itself and causes to
materialize the conditions and opportunities needed to accomplish
the purpose. Do not think I over estimate the value of the Mental
Demand. It brings the fuller life if used for only righteous
purposes. Once the Mental Demand is made, however, never let it
falter. If you do the current that connects you with your desire
is broken. Take all the necessary time to build a firm
foundation, so that there need not be even an element of doubt to
creep in. Just the moment you entertain "doubt" you lose some of
the demand force, and force once lost is hard to regain. So
whenever you make a mental demand hold steadfastly to it until
your need is supplied.

I want to repeat again that Power of Mental Demand is not a
visionary one. It is concentrated power only, and can be used by
you. It is not supernatural power, but requires a development of
the brain centers. The outcome is sure when it is given with a
strong resolute determination.

No person will advance to any great extent, until he recognizes
this force within him. If you have not become aware of it, you
have not made very much of a success of your life. It is this
"something" that distinguishes that "man" from other men. It is
this subtle power that develops strong personality.

If you want a great deal you must demand a great deal. Once you
make your demand, anticipate its fulfillment. It depends upon us.
We are rewarded according to our efforts. The Power of Mental
Demand can bring us what we want. We become what we determine to
be. We control our own destiny.


Get the right mental attitude, then in accordance with your
ability you can gain success.

And every man of AVERAGE ability, the ordinary man that you see
about you, can be really successful, independent, free of worry,
HIS OWN MASTER, if he can manage to do just two things.

First, remain forever dissatisfied with what he IS doing and with
what he HAS accomplished.

Second, develop in his mind a belief that the word impossible was
not intended or him. Build up in his mind the confidence that
enables the mind to use its power.

Many, especially the older men, will ask:

"How can I build up that self-confidence in my brain? How can I,
after months and years of discouragement, of dull plodding,
suddenly conceive and carry out a plan for doing something that
will make life worth while and change the monotonous routine?

"How can a man get out of a rut after he has been in it for years
and has settled down to the slow jog-trot that leads to the
grave?"

The answer is the thing can be done, and millions have done it.

One of the names most honored among the great men of France is
that of Littre, who wrote and compiled the great French
dictionary--a monument of learning. He is the man whose place
among the forty immortals of France was taken by the great
Pasteur, when the latter was elected to the Academy.

Littre BEGAN the work that makes him famous when he was more than
sixty years old.



LESSON VIII. CONCENTRATION GIVES MENTAL POISE

You will find that the man that concentrates is well poised,
whereas the man that allows his mind to wander is easily upset.
When in this state wisdom does not pass from the subconscious
storehouse into the consciousness. There must be mental quiet
before the two consciousnesses can work in harmony. When you are
able to concentrate you have peace of mind.

If you are in the habit of losing your poise, form the habit of
reading literature that has a quieting power. Just the second you
feel your poise slipping, say, "Peace," and then hold this
thought in mind and you will never lose your self-control.

There cannot be perfect concentration until there is peace of
mind. So keep thinking peace, acting peace, until you are at
peace with all the world. For when once you have reached this
state there will be no trouble to concentrate on anything you
wish.

When you have peace of mind you are not timid or anxious, or
fearful, or rigid and you will not allow any disturbing thought
to influence you. You cast aside all fears, and think of yourself
as a spark of the Divine Being, as a manifestation of the "One
Universal Principle" that fills all space and time. Think of
yourself thus as a child of the infinite, possessing infinite
possibilities.

Write on a piece of paper, "I have the power to do and to be
whatever I wish to do and be." Keep this mentally before you, and
you will find the thought will be of great help to you.

The Mistake of Concentrating on Your Business While Away. In
order to be successful today, you must concentrate, but don't
become a slave to concentration, and carry your business cares
home. Just as sure as you do you will be burning the life forces
at both ends and the fire will go out much sooner than was
intended.

Many men become so absorbed in their business that when they go
to church they do not hear the preacher because their minds are
on their business. If they go to the theater they do not enjoy it
because their business is on their minds. When they go to bed
they think about business instead of sleep and wonder why they
don't sleep. This is the wrong kind of concentration and is
dangerous. It is involuntary. When you are unable to get anything
out of your mind it becomes unwholesome as any thought held
continuously causes weariness of the flesh. It is a big mistake
to let a thought rule you, instead of ruling it. He who does not
rule himself is not a success. If you cannot control your
concentration, your health will suffer.

So never become so absorbed with anything that you cannot lay it
aside and take up another. This is self-control.

Concentration Is Paying Attention to a Chosen Thought. Everything
that passes before the eye makes an impression on the
subconscious mind, but unless you pay attention to some certain
thing you will not remember what you saw. For instance if you
walked down a busy street without seeing anything that attracted
your particular attention, you could not recall anything you saw.
So you see only what attracts your attention. If you work you
only see and remember what you think about. When you concentrate
on something it absorbs your whole thought.

Self-Study Valuable. Everyone has some habits that can be
overcome by concentration. We will say for instance, you are in
the habit of complaining, or finding fault with yourself or
others; or, imagining that you do not possess the ability of
others; or feeling that you are not as good as someone else; or
that you cannot rely on yourself; or harboring any similar
thoughts or thoughts of weakness. These should be cast aside and
instead thoughts of strength should be put in their place. Just
remember every time you think of yourself as being weak, in some
way you are making yourself so by thinking you are. Our mental
conditions make us what we are. Just watch yourself and see how
much time you waste in worrying, fretting and complaining. The
more of it you do the worse off you are.

Just the minute you are aware of thinking a negative thought
immediately change to a positive one. If you start to think of
failure, change to thinking of success. You have the germ of
success within you. Care for it the same as the setting hen
broods over the eggs and you can make it a reality.

You can make those that you come in contact with feel as you do,
because you radiate vibrations of the way you feel and your
vibrations are felt by others. When you concentrate on a certain
thing you turn all the rays of your vibrations on this. Thought
is the directing power of all Life's vibrations. If a person
should enter a room with a lot of people and feel as if he were a
person of no consequence no one would know he was there unless
they saw him, and even if they did, they would not remember
seeing him, because they were not attracted towards him. But let
him enter the room feeling that he was magnetic and concentrating
on this thought, others would feel his vibration. So remember the
way you feel you can make others feel. This is the law. Make
yourself a concentrated dynamo from which your thoughts vibrate
to others. Then you are a power in the world. Cultivate the art
of feeling, for as I said before you can only make others feel
what you feel.

If you will study all of the great characters of history you will
find that they were enthusiastic. First they were enthusiastic
themselves, and then they could arouse others' enthusiasm. It is
latent in everyone. It is a wonderful force when once aroused.
All public men to be a success have to possess it. Cultivate it
by concentration. Set aside some hour of the day, wherein to hold
rapt converse with the soul. Meditate with sincere desire and
contrite heart and you will be able to accomplish that which you
have meditated on. This is the keynote of success.


"Think, speak and act just as you wish to be, And you will be
that which you wish to be."


You are just what you think you are and not what you may appear
to be. You may fool others but not yourself. You may control your
life and actions just as you can control your hands. If you want
to raise your hand you must first think of raising it. If you
want to control your life you must first control your thinking.
Easy to do, is it not? Yes it is, if you will but concentrate on
what you think about.

 For he only can
 That says he will.


How can we secure concentration? To this question, the first and
last answer must be: By interest and strong motive. The stronger
the motive the greater the concentration.--Eustace Miller, M. D.

The Successful Lives Are the Concentrated Lives. The utterly
helpless multitude that sooner or later have to be cared for by
charity, are those that were never able to concentrate, and who
have become the victims of negative ideas.

Train yourself so you will be able to centralize your thought and
develop your brain power, and increase your mental energy, or you
can be a slacker, a drifter, a quitter or a sleeper. It all
depends on how you concentrate, or centralize your thoughts. Your
thinking then becomes a fixed power and you do not waste time
thinking about something that would not be good for you. You pick
out the thoughts that will be the means of bringing you what you
desire, and they become a material reality. Whatever we create in
the thought world will some day materialize. That is the law.
Don't forget this.

In the old days men drifted without concentration but this is a
day of efficiency and therefore all of our efforts must be
concentrated, if we are to win any success worth the name.

Why People Often Do Not Get What They Concentrate On. Because
they sit down in hopeless despair and expect it to come to them.
But if they will just reach out for it with their biggest effort
they will find it is within their reach. No one limits us but
ourselves. We are what we are today as the result of internal
conditions. We can control the external conditions. They are
subject to our will.

Through our concentration we can attract what we want, because we
became enrapport with the Universal forces, from which we can get
what we want.

You have watched races no doubt. They all line up together. Each
has his mind set on getting to the goal before the others. This
is one kind of concentration. A man starts to think on a certain
subject. He has all kinds of thoughts come to him, but by
concentration he shuts out all these but the one he has chosen.
Concentration is just a case of willing to do a certain thing and
doing it.


If you want to accomplish anything first put yourself in a
concentrating, reposeful, receptive, acquiring frame of mind. In
tackling unfamiliar work make haste slowly and deliberately and
then you will secure that interior activity, which is never
possible when you are in a hurry or under a strain. When you
"think hard" or try to hurry results too quickly, you generally
shut off the interior flow of thoughts and ideas. You have often
no doubt tried hard to think of something but could not, but just
as soon as you stopped trying to think of it, it came to you.



LESSON IX. CONCENTRATION CAN OVERCOME BAD HABITS

Habits make or break us to a far greater extent than we like to
admit. Habit is both a powerful enemy and wonderful ally of
concentration. You must learn to overcome habits which are
injurious to concentration, and to cultivate those which increase
it.

The large majority of people are controlled by their habits and
are buffeted around by them like waves of the ocean tossing a
piece of wood. They do things in a certain way because of the
power of habit. They seldom ever think of concentrating on why
they do them this or that way, or study to see if they could do
them in a better way. Now my object in this chapter is to get you
to concentrate on your habits so you can find out which are good
and which are bad for you. You will find that by making a few
needed changes you can make even those that are not good for you,
of service; the good habits you can make much better.

The first thing I want you to realize is that all habits are
governed consciously or unconsciously by the will. Most of us are
forming new habits all the time. Very often, if you repeat
something several times in the same way, you will have formed the
habit of doing it that way. But the oftener you repeat it the
stronger that habit grows and the more deeply it becomes embedded
in your nature. After a habit has been in force for a long time,
it becomes almost a part of you, and is therefore hard to
overcome. But you can still break any habit by strong
concentration on its opposite.

"All our life, so far as it has definite form, is but a mass of
habits--practical, emotional, and intellectual--systematically
organized, for our weal or woe, and bearing us irresistibly
toward our destiny whatever the latter may be."

We are creatures of habits, "imitators and copiers of our past
selves." We are liable to be "bent" or "curved" as we can bend a
piece of paper, and each fold leaves a crease, which makes it
easier to make the fold there the next time. "The intellect and
will are spiritual functions; still they are immersed in matter,
and to every movement of theirs, corresponds a movement in the
brain, that is, in their material correlative." This is why
habits of thought and habits of willing can be formed. All
physical impressions are the carrying out of the actions of the
will and intellect. Our nervous systems are what they are today,
because of the way they have been exercised.

As we grow older most of us become more and more like automatic
machines. The habits we have formed increase in strength. We work
in our old characteristic way. Your associates learn to expect
you to do things in a certain way. So you see that your habits
make a great difference in your life, and as it is just about as
easy to form good habits as it is bad, you should form only the
former. No one but yourself is responsible for your habits. You
are free to form the habits that you should and if everyone could
realize the importance of forming the right kind of habits what a
different world this would be. How much happier everyone would
be. Then all instead of the few might win success.

Habits are formed more quickly when we are young, but if we have
already passed the youthful plastic period the time to start to
control our habits is right now, as we will never be any younger.

You will find the following maxims worth remembering.

First Maxim:

"We must make our nervous system our ally instead of our enemy."


Second Maxim:

"In the acquisition of a new habit as in the leaving off of an
old one, we must take care to launch ourselves with as strong and
decided an initiative as possible."

The man that is in the habit of doing the right thing from
boyhood, has only good motives, so it is very important for you
that you concentrate assiduously on the habits that reinforce
good motives. Surround yourself with every aid you can. Don't
play with fire by forming bad habits. Make a new beginning today.
Study why you have been doing certain things. If they are not for
your good, shun them henceforth. Don't give in to a single
temptation for every time you do, you strengthen the chain of bad
habits. Every time you keep a resolution you break the chain that
enslaves you.


Third Maxim:

"Never allow an exception to occur till the new habit is securely
rooted in your life." Here is the idea, you never want to give
in, until the new habit is fixed else you undo all that has been
accomplished by previous efforts. There are two opposing
inclinations. One wants to be firm, and the other wants to give
in. By your will you can become firm, through repetition. Fortify
your will to be able to cope with any and all opposition.


Fourth Maxim:

"Seize the very first possible opportunity to act on every
resolution you make, and on every emotional prompting you may
experience in the direction of the habits you aspire to gain."

To make a resolve and not to keep it is of little value. So by
all means keep every resolution you make, for you not only profit
by the resolution, but it furnishes you with an exercise that
causes the brain cells and physiological correlatives to form the
habit of adjusting themselves to carry out resolutions. "A
tendency to act, becomes effectively engrained in us in
proportion to the uninterrupted frequency with which the actions
actually occur, and the brain `grows' to their use. When a
resolve or a fine glow of feeling is allowed to evaporate without
bearing fruit, it is worse than a chance lost."

If you keep your resolutions you form a most valuable habit. If
you break them you form a most dangerous one. So concentrate on
keeping them, whether important or unimportant, and remember it
is just as important for this purpose to keep the unimportant,
for by so doing you are forming the habit.


Fifth Maxim:

"Keep the faculty of effort alive in you by a little gratuitous
exercise every day."

The more we exercise the will, the better we can control our
habits. "Every few days do something for no other reason than its
difficulty, so that when the hour of dire need draws nigh, it may
find you not unnerved or untrained to stand the test. Asceticism
of this sort is like the insurance which a man pays on his house
and goods. The tax does him no good at the time, and possibly may
never bring him a return, but if the fire does come, his having
paid it will be his salvation from ruin. So with the man who has
daily insured himself to habits of concentrated attention,
energetic volation, and self-denial in unnecessary things. "He
will stand like a tower when everything rocks around him and his
softer fellow-mortals are winnowed like chaff in the blast."

The young should be made to concentrate on their habits and be
made to realize that if they don't they become walking bundles of
injurious habits. Youth is the plastic state, and should be
utilized in laying the foundation for a glorious future.

The great value of habit for good and evil cannot be
overestimated. "Habit is the deepest law of human nature." No man
is stronger than his habits, because his habits either build up
his strength or decrease it.

Why We Are Creatures of Habits. Habits have often been called a
labor-saving invention, because when they are formed they require
less of both mental and material strength. The more deeply the
habit becomes ingrained the more automatic it becomes. Therefore
habit is an economizing tendency of our nature, for if it were
not for habit we should have to be more watchful. We walk across
a crowded street; the habit of stopping and looking prevents us
from being hurt. The right kind of habits keeps us from making
mistakes and mishaps. It is a well known fact that a chauffeur is
not able to master his machine safely until he has trained his
body in a habitual way. When an emergency comes he instantly
knows what to do. Where safety depends on quickness the operator
must work automatically. Habits mean less risk, less fatigue, and
greater accuracy.

"You do not want to become a slave to habits of a trivial nature.
For instance, Wagner required a certain costume before he could
compose corresponding parts of his operas. Schiller could never
write with ease unless there were rotten apples in the drawer of
his desk from which he could now and then obtain an odor which
seemed to him sweet. Gladstone had different desks for his
different activities, so that when he worked on Homer he never
sat among habitual accompaniments of his legislative labors."

In order to overcome undesirable habits, two things are
necessary. You must have trained your will to do what you want it
to do, and the stronger the will the easier it will be to break a
habit. Then you must make a resolution to do just the opposite of
what the habit is. Therefore one habit must replace another. If
you have a strong will, you can tenaciously and persistently
concentrate on removing the bad habit and in a very short time
the good habit will gain the upper hand. I will bring this
chapter to a close by giving Doctor Oppenheim's instructions for
overcoming a habit:

"If you want to abolish a habit, and its accumulated
circumstances as well, you must grapple with the matter as
earnestly as you would with a physical enemy. You must go into
the encounter with all tenacity of determination, with all
fierceness of resolve--yea, even with a passion for success that
may be called vindictive. No human enemy can be as insidious, so
persevering, as unrelenting as an unfavorable habit. It never
sleeps, it needs no rest.

"It is like a parasite that grows with the growth of the
supporting body, and, like a parasite, it can best be killed by
violent separation and crushing.


When life is stormy and all seems against us, that is when we
often acquire wrong habits, and it is then, that we have to make
a gigantic effort to think and speak as we should; and even
though we may feel the very reverse at that moment the tiniest
effort will be backed up by a tremendous Power and will lift us
to a realization never felt before. It is not in the easy,
contented moments of our life that we make our greatest progress,
for then it requires, no special effort to keep in tune. But it
is when we are in the midst of trials and misfortunes, when we
think we are sinking, being overwhelmed, then it is important for
us to realize that we are linked to a great Power and if we live
as we should, there is nothing that can occur in life, which
could permanently injure us, nothing can happen that should
disturb us. So always remember you have within you unlimited
power, ready to manifest itself in the form which fills our need
at the moment. If, when we have something difficult to solve, we
would be silent like the child, we can get the inspiration when
it comes; we will know how to act, we will find there is no need
to hurry or disturb ourselves, that it is always wiser to wait
for guidance from within, than to act on impulse from Without.



LESSON X. BUSINESS RESULTS THROUGH CONCENTRATION

A successful business is not usually the result of chance.
Neither is a failure the result of luck. Most failures could be
determined in advance if the founders had been studied. It is not
always possible to start a money-making business at the start.
Usually a number of changes have to be made. Plans do not work
out as their creators thought they would. They may have to be
changed a little, broadened it may be, here and there, and as you
broaden your business you broaden your power to achieve. You gain
an intense and sustained desire to make your business a success.

When you start a business you may have but a vague notion of the
way you will conduct it. You must fill in the details as you go
along. You must concentrate on these details. As you straighten
out one after another, others will require attention. In this way
you cover the field of "the first endeavor" and new opportunities
open up for you.

When you realize one desire, another comes. But if you do not
fulfill the first desire, you will not the second. The person
that does not carry his desires into action is only a dreamer.
Desire is a great creative force, if it is pure, intense and
sustained. It is our desires that keep stirring us up to action
and they will strengthen and broaden you if you make them
materialize.

Every man who achieves success deserves it. When he first started
out he did not understand how to solve the problems that
afterwards presented themselves, but he did each thing as it came
up in the very best way that he could, and this developed his
power of doing bigger things. We become masters of business by
learning to do well whatever we attempt. The man that has a
thorough knowledge of his business can of course direct it much
more easily and skillfully than the man who lacks that knowledge.
The skilled business director can sit in his private office and
still know accurately what is actually being done. He knows what
should be done in any given time and if it is not accomplished he
knows that his employees are not turning out the work that they
should. It is then easy to apply the remedy.

Business success depends on well-concentrated efforts. You must
use every mental force you can master. The more these are used
the more they increase. Therefore the more you accomplish today
the more force you will have at your disposal with which to solve
your problems tomorrow.

If you are working for someone else today and wish to start in a
business for yourself, think over carefully what you would like
to do. Then when you have resolved what you want to do, you will
be drawn towards it. There is a law that opens the way to the
fulfillment of your desires. Of course back of your desire you
must put forward the necessary effort to carry out your purpose;
you must use your power to put your desires into force. Once they
are created and you keep up your determination to have them
fulfilled you both consciously and unconsciously work toward
their materialization. Set your heart on your purpose,
concentrate your thought upon it, direct your efforts with all
your intelligence and in due time you will realize your ambition.

Feel yourself a success, believe you are a success and thus put
yourself in the attitude that demands recognition and the thought
current draws to you what you need to make you a success. Don't
be afraid of big undertakings. Go at them with grit, and pursue
methods that you think will accomplish your purpose. You may not
at first meet with entire success, but aim so high that if you
fall a little short you will still have accomplished much.

What others have done you can do. You may even do what others
have been unable to do. Always keep a strong desire to succeed in
your mind. Be in love with your aim and work, and make them, as
far as possible, square with the rule of the greatest good to the
greatest number and your life cannot be a failure.

The successful business attitude must be cultivated to make the
most out of your life, the attitude of expecting great things
from both yourself and others. It alone will often cause men to
make good; to measure up to the best that is in them.

It is not the spasmodic spurts that count on a long journey, but
the steady efforts. Spurts fatigue and make it hard for you to
continue.

Rely on your own opinion. It should be as good as anyone's else.
When once you reach a conclusion abide by it. Let there be no
doubt, or wavering in your judgment. If you are uncertain about
every decision you make, you will be subject to harassing doubts
and fears which will render your judgment of little value. The
man that decides according to what he thinks right and who learns
from every mistake acquires a well balanced mind that gets the
best results. He gains the confidence of others. He is known as
the man that knows what he wants, and not as one that is as
changeable as the weather. The man of today wants to do business
with the man that he can depend upon. Uncertainties in the
business world are meeting with more disfavor. Reliable firms
want to do business with men of known qualities, with men of
firmness, judgment and reliability.

So if you wish to start in business for yourself your greatest
asset, with the single exception of a sound physique, is that of
a good reputation.

A successful business is not hard to build if we can concentrate
all our mental forces upon it. It is the man that is unsettled
because he does not know what he wants that goes to the wall. We
hear persons say that business is trying on the nerves, but it is
the unsettling elements of fret and worry and suspense that are
nerve-exhausting and not the business. Executing one's plans may
cause fatigue, enjoyment comes with rest. If there has not been
any unnatural strain, the recuperative powers replace what energy
has been lost.

By attending to each day's work properly you develop the capacity
to do a greater work tomorrow. It is this gradual development
that makes possible the carrying out of big plans. The man that
figures out doing something each hour of the day gets somewhere.
At the end of each day you should be a step nearer your aim. Keep
the idea in mind, that you mean to go forward, that each day must
mark an advance and forward you will go. You do not even have to
know the exact direction so long as you are determined to find
the way. But you must not turn back once you have started.

Even brilliant men's conceptions of the possibilities of their
mental forces are so limited and below their real worth that they
are far more likely to belittle their possibilities than they are
to exaggerate them. You don't want to think that an aim is
impossible because it has never been realized in the past. Every
day someone is doing something that was never done before. We are
pushing ahead faster. Formerly it took decades to build up a big
business, but today it is only but a matter of years, sometimes
of months.

Plan each day's activities carefully and you can reach any height
you aim at. If each thing you do is done with concise and
concentrated thought you will be able to turn out an excellent
quality and a large quantity of work. Plan to do so much work
during the day and you will be astonished to see how much more
you will do, than on other days, when you had not decided on any
certain amount. I have demonstrated that the average business
working force could do the same amount of work in six hours that
they now do in eight, without using up any more energy. Never
start to accomplish anything in an indecisive, indefinite,
uncertain way. Tackle everything with a positiveness and an
earnestness that will concentrate your mind and attract the very
best associated thoughts. You will in a short time find that you
will have extra time for planning bigger things.

The natural leader always draws to himself, by the law of mental
attraction, ideas in his chosen subject that have ever been
conceived by others. This is of the greatest importance and help.
If you are properly trained you benefit much by others' thoughts,
and, providing you generate from within yourself something of
value, they will benefit from yours. "We are heirs of all the
ages," but we must know how to use our inheritance.

The confident, pushing, hopeful, determined man influences all
with whom he associates, and inspires the same qualities in them.
You feel that his is a safe example to follow and he rouses the
same force within you that is pushing him onward and upward.

One seldom makes a success of anything that he goes at in a
listless, spiritless way. To build up a business you must see it
expanding in your mind before it actually takes tangible shape.
Every great task that has ever been accomplished has first been
merely a vision in the mind of its creator. Detail after detail
has had to be worked out in his mind from his first faint idea of
the enterprise. Finally a clear idea was formed and then the
accomplishment, which was only the material result of the mental
concept, followed.

The up-to-date business man is not content to build only for the
present, but is planning ahead. If he does not he will fall
behind his competitor, who is. What we are actually doing today
was carefully thought out and planned by others in the past. All
progressive businesses are conducted this way. That is why the
young business man of today is likely to accomplish more in a few
years than his father did in all his life. There is no reason why
your work or business should fag you out. When it does there is
something wrong. You are attracting forces and influence that you
should not, because you are not in harmony with what you are
doing. There is nothing so tiring as to try to do the work for
which we are unfitted, both by temperament and training.

Each one should be engaged in a business that he loves; he should
be furthering movements with which he is in sympathy. He will
then only do his best work and take intense pleasure in his
business. In this way, while constantly growing and developing
his powers, he is at the same time rendering through his work,
genuine and devoted service to humanity.

Business success is not the result of chance, but of scientific
ideas and plans carried out by an aggressive and progressive
management. Use your mental forces so that they will grow and
develop. Remember that everything you do is the result of mental
action, therefore you can completely control your every action.
Nothing is impossible for you. Don't be afraid to tackle a
difficult proposition. Your success will depend upon the use you
make of your mind. This is capable of wonderful development. See
that you make full use of it, and not only develop yourself but
your associates. Try to broaden the visions of those with whom
you come in contact and you will broaden your own outlook of
life.


Are You Afraid of Responsibilities? In order for the individual
soul to develop, you must have responsibilities. You must
manifest the omnipotence of the law of supply. The whole world is
your legitimate sphere of activity. How much of a conqueror are
you? What have you done? Are you afraid of responsibility, or are
you ever dodging, flinching, or side stepping it. If you are, you
are not a Real Man. Your higher self never winces, so be a man
and allow the powers of the higher self to manifest and you will
find you have plenty of strength and you will feel better when
you are tackling difficult propositions.



LESSON XI. CONCENTRATE ON COURAGE

Courage is the backbone of man. The man with courage has
persistence. He states what he believes and puts it into
execution. The courageous man has confidence. He draws to himself
all the moral qualities and mental forces which go to make up a
strong man. Whereas, the man without courage draws to himself all
the qualities of a weak man, vacillation, doubt, hesitancy, and
unsteadiness of purpose. You can therefore see the value of
concentration on courage. It is a most vital element of success.

The lack of courage creates financial, as well as mental and
moral difficulties. When a new problem comes, instead of looking
upon it as something to be achieved, the man or woman without
courage looks for reasons why it cannot be done and failure is
naturally the almost inevitable result. This is a subject well
worthy of your study. Look upon everything within your power as a
possibility instead of as merely a probability and you will
accomplish a great deal more, because by considering a thing as
impossible, you immediately draw to yourself all the elements
that contribute to failure. Lack of courage destroys your
confidence in yourself. It destroys that forceful, resolute
attitude so important to success.

The man without courage unconsciously draws to himself all that
is contemptible, weakening, demoralizing and destructive. He then
blames his luck when he does not secure the things he weakly
desires. We must first have the courage to strongly desire
something. A desire to be fulfilled must be backed by the
strength of all our mental forces. Such a desire has enough
commanding force to change all unfavorable conditions. The man
with courage commands, whether he is on the battlefield or in
business life.

What is courage? It is the Will To Do. It takes no more energy to
be courageous than to be cowardly. It is a matter of the right
training in the right way. Courage concentrates the mental forces
on the task at hand. It then directs them thoughtfully, steadily,
deliberately, while attracting all the forces of success, toward
the desired end. Cowardice on the other hand, dissipates both our
mental and moral forces, thereby inviting failure.

As we are creatures of habits, we should avoid persons that lack
courage. They are easy to discover because of their habits of
fear in attacking new problems. The man with courage is never
afraid.

Start out today with the idea that there is no reason why you
should not be courageous. If any fear-thoughts come to you cast
them off as you would the deadly viper. Form the habit of never
thinking of anything unfavorable to yourself or anyone else. In
dealing with difficulties, new or old, hold ever the thought, "I
am courageous." Whenever a doubt crosses the threshold of your
mind, banish it. Remember, you as master of your mind control its
every thought, and here is a good one to often affirm, "I have
courage because I desire it; because I need it; because I use it
and because I refuse to become such a weakling as cowardice
produces."

There is no justification for the loss of courage. The evils by
which you will almost certainly be overwhelmed without it are far
greater than those which courage will help you to meet and
overcome. Right, then, must be the moralist who says that the
only thing to fear is fear.

Never let another's opinion affect you; he cannot tell what you
are able to do; he does not know what you can do with your
forces. The truth is you do not know yourself until you put
yourself to the test. Therefore, how can someone else know? Never
let anyone else put a valuation on you.

Almost all wonderful achievements have been accomplished after it
had been "thoroughly" demonstrated that they were
impossibilities. Once we understand the law, all things are
possible. If they were impossibilities we could not conceive
them.

Just the moment you allow someone to influence you against what
you think is right, you lose that confidence in yourself that
inspires courage and carries with it all the forces which courage
creates. Just the moment you begin to swerve in your plan you
begin to carry out another's thought and not your own. You become
the directed and not the director. You forsake the courage and
resolution of your own mind, and you therefore lack the very
forces that you need to sustain and carry out your work. Instead
of being self-reliant you become timid and this invites failure.
When you permit yourself to be influenced from your plan by
another, you are unable to judge as you should, because you have
allowed another's influence to deprive you of your courage and
determination without absorbing any of his in return so you are
in much the same predicament, as you would be in if you turned
over all your worldly possessions to another without getting
"value received."

Concentrate on just the opposite of fear, want, poverty,
sickness, etc. Never doubt your own ability. You have plenty, if
you will just use it. A great many men are failures because they
doubt their own capacity. Instead of building up strong mental
forces which would be of the greatest use to them their fear
thoughts tear them down. Fear paralyzes energy. It keeps us from
attracting the forces that go to make up success. Fear is the
worst enemy we have.

There are few people that really know that they can accomplish
much. They desire the full extent of their powers, but alas, it
is only occasionally that you find a man that is aware of the
great possibilities within him. When you believe with all your
mind and heart and soul that you can do something, you thereby
develop the courage to steadily and confidently live up to that
belief. You have now gone a long way towards accomplishing it.
The chances are that there will be obstacles, big and little, in
your way, but resolute courage will overcome them and nothing
else will. Strong courage eliminates the injurious and opposing
forces by summoning their masters, the yet stronger forces that
will serve you.

Courage is yours for the asking. All you have to do is to believe
in it, claim it and use it. To succeed in business believe that
it will be successful, assert that it is successful, and work
like a beaver to make it so. Difficulties soon melt away before
the courageous. One man of courage can fire with his spirit a
whole army of men, whether it be military or industrial, because
courage, like cowardice, is contagious.

The man of courage overcomes the trials and temptations of life;
he commands success; he renders sound judgment; he develops
personal influence and a forceful character and often becomes the
mentor of the community which he serves.


How to Overcome Depression and Melancholia. Both of the former
are harmful and make you unhappy. These are states that can be
quickly overcome through concentrating more closely on the higher
self, for when you do you cut off the connection with the harmful
force currents. You can also drive away moods by simply choosing
and fully concentrating on an agreeable subject. Through will
power and thought control we can accomplish anything we want to
do. There is wonderful inherent power within us all, and there is
never any sufficient cause for fear, except ignorance.

Every evil is but the product of ignorance, and everyone that
possesses the power to think has the power to overcome ignorance
and evil. The pain that we suffer from doing evil are but the
lessons of experience, and the object of the pain is to make us
realize our ignorance. When we become depressed It is evidence
that our thought faculties are combining improperly and thereby
attracting the wrong force-currents.

All that it is necessary to do is to exercise the will and
concentrate upon happy subjects. I will only think of subjects
worthy of my higher self and its powers.



LESSON XII. CONCENTRATE ON WEALTH

It was never intended that man should be poor. When wealth is
obtained under the proper conditions it broadens the life.
Everything has its value. Everything has a good use and a bad
use. The forces of mind like wealth can be directed either for
good or evil. A little rest will re-create forces. Too much rest
degenerates into laziness, and brainless, dreamy longings.

If you acquire wealth unjustly from others, you are misusing your
forces; but if your wealth comes through the right sources you
will be blessed. Through wealth we can do things to uplift
ourselves and humanity.

Wealth is many persons' goal. It therefore stimulates their
endeavor. They long for it in order to dress and live in such a
way as to attract friends. Without friends they would not be so
particular of their surroundings. The fact is the more attractive
we make ourselves and our surroundings the more inspiring are
their influences. It is not conducive to proper thought to be
surrounded by conditions that are uncongenial and unpleasant.

So the first step toward acquiring wealth is to surround yourself
with helpful influences; to claim for yourself an environment of
culture, place yourself in it and be molded by its influences.

Most great men of all ages have been comparatively rich. They
have made or inherited money. Without money they could not have
accomplished what they did. The man engaged in physical drudgery
is not likely to have the same high ideals as the man that can
command comparative leisure.

Wealth is usually the fruit of achievement. It is not, however,
altogether the result of being industrious. Thousands of persons
work hard who never grow wealthy. Others with much less effort
acquire wealth. Seeing possibilities is another step toward
acquiring wealth. A man may be as industrious as he can possibly
be, but if he does not use his mental forces he will be a
laborer, to be directed by the man that uses to good advantage
his mental forces.

No one can become wealthy in an ordinary lifetime, by mere
savings from earnings. Many scrimp and economize all their lives;
but by so doing waste all their vitality and energy. For example,
I know a man that used to walk to work. It took him an hour to go
and an hour to return. He could have taken a car and gone in
twenty minutes. He saved ten cents a day but wasted an hour and a
half. It was not a very profitable investment unless the time
spent in physical exercise yielded him large returns in the way
of health.

The same amount of time spent in concentrated effort to overcome
his unfavorable business environment might have firmly planted
his feet in the path of prosperity.

One of the big mistakes made by many persons of the present
generation is that they associate with those who fail to call out
or develop the best that is in them. When the social side of life
is developed too exclusively, as it often is, and recreation or
entertainment becomes the leading motive of a person's life, he
acquires habits of extravagance instead of economy; habits of
wasting his resources, physical, mental, moral and spiritual,
instead of conserving them. He is, in consequence, lacking in
proper motivation, his God-given powers and forces are
undeveloped and he inevitably brings poor judgment to bear upon
all the higher relationships of life, while, as to his financial
fortunes, he is ever the leaner; often a parasite, and always, if
opportunity affords, as heavy a consumer as he is a poor
producer.

It seems a part of the tragedy of life that these persons have to
be taught such painful lessons before they can understand the
forces and laws that regulate life. Few profit by the mistakes of
others. They must experience them for themselves and then apply
the knowledge so gained in reconstructing their lives.

Any man that has ever amounted to anything has never done a great
deal of detail work for long periods at any given time. He needs
his time to reflect. He does not do his duties today in the same
way as yesterday, but as the result of deliberate and
concentrated effort, constantly tries to improve his methods.

The other day I attended a lecture on Prosperity. I knew the
lecturer had been practically broke for ten years. I wanted to
hear what he had to say. He spoke very well. He no doubt
benefited some of his hearers, but he had not profited by his own
teachings. I introduced myself and asked him if he believed in
his maxims. He said he did. I asked him if they had made him
prosperous. He said not exactly. I asked him why. He answered
that he thought he was fated not to experience prosperity.

In half an hour I showed that man why poverty had always been his
companion. He had dressed poorly. He held his lectures in poor
surroundings. By his actions and beliefs he attracted poverty. He
did not realize that his thoughts and his surroundings exercised
an unfavorable influence. I said: "Thoughts are moving forces;
great powers. Thoughts of wealth attract wealth. Therefore, if
you desire wealth you must attract the forces that will help you
to secure it. Your thoughts attract a similar kind of thoughts.
If you hold thoughts of poverty you attract poverty. If you make
up your mind you are going to be wealthy, you will instil this
thought into all your mental forces, and you will at the same
time use every external condition to help you."

Many persons are of the opinion that if you have money it is easy
to make more money. But this is not necessarily true. Ninety per
cent of the men that start in business fail. Money will not
enable one to accumulate much more, unless he is trained to seek
and use good opportunities for its investment. If he inherits
money the chances are that he will lose it. While, if he has made
it, he not only knows its value, but has developed the power to
use it as well as to make more if he loses it.

Business success today depends on foresight, good judgment, grit,
firm resolution and settled purpose. But never forget that
thought is as real a force as electricity. Let your thoughts be
such, that you will send out as good as you receive; if you do
not, you are not enriching others, and therefore deserve not to
be enriched.

The man that tries to get all he can from others for nothing
becomes so selfish and mean that he does not even enjoy his
acquisitions. We see examples of this every day. What we take
from others, will in turn, be taken from us. All obligations have
to be met fairly and squarely. We cannot reach perfection until
we discharge every obligation of our lives. We all realize this,
so why not willingly give a fair exchange for all that we
receive?

Again I repeat that the first as well as the last step in
acquiring wealth is to surround yourself with good
influences--good thought, good health, good home and business
environment and successful business associates. Cultivate, by
every legitimate means, the acquaintance of men of big caliber.
Bring your thought vibrations in regard to business into harmony
with theirs. This will make your society not only agreeable, but
sought after, and, when you have formed intimate friendships with
clean, reputable men of wealth, entrust to them, for investment,
your surplus earnings, however small, until you have developed
the initiative and business acumen to successfully manage your
own investments. By this time you will, through such
associations, have found your place in life which, if you have
rightly concentrated upon and used your opportunities, will not
be among men of small parts. With a competence secured, you will
take pleasure in using a part of it in making the road you
traveled in reaching your position easier for those who follow
you.


There is somewhere in every brain the energy that will get you
out of that rut and put you far up on the mountain of success if
you can only use the energy.

You know that gasoline in the engine of an automobile doesn't
move the car until the spark comes to explode the gasoline.

So it is with the mind of man. We are not speaking now of men of
great genius, but of average, able citizens.

Each one of them has in his brain the capacity to climb over the
word impossible and get into the successful country beyond.

And hope, self-confidence and the determination to do something
supply the spark that makes the energy work.



LESSON XIII. YOU CAN CONCENTRATE, BUT WILL YOU?

All have the ability to concentrate, but will you? You can, but
whether you will or not depends on you. It is one thing to be
able to do something, and another thing to do it. There is far
more ability not used than is used. Why do not more men of
ability make something of themselves? There are comparatively few
successful men but many ambitious ones. Why do not more get
along? Cases may differ, but the fault is usually their own. They
have had chances, perhaps better ones than some others that have
made good.

What would you like to do, that you are not doing? If you think
you should be "getting on" better, why don't you? Study yourself
carefully. Learn your shortcomings. Sometimes only a mere trifle
keeps one from branching out and becoming a success. Discover why
you have not been making good--the cause of your failure. Have
you been expecting someone to lead you, or to make a way for you?
If you have, concentrate on a new line of thought.

There are two things absolutely necessary for success--energy and
the will to succeed. Nothing can take the place of either of
these. Most of us will not have an easy path to follow so don't
expect to find one. The hard knocks develop our courage and moral
stamina. The persons that live in an indolent and slipshod way
never have any. They have never faced conditions and therefore
don't know how. The world is no better for their living.

We must make favorable conditions and not expect them to shape
themselves. It is not the man that says, "It can't be done," but
the man that goes ahead in spite of adverse advice, and shows
that "it can be done" that "gets there" today. "The Lord helps
those that help themselves," is a true saying. We climb the road
to success by overcoming obstacles. Stumbling blocks are but
stepping stones for the man that says, "I can and I Will." When
we see cripples, the deaf and dumb, the blind and those with
other handicaps amounting to something in the world, the
able-bodied man should feel ashamed of himself if he does not
make good.

There is nothing that can resist the force of perseverance. The
way ahead of all of us is not clear sailing, but all hard
passages can be bridged, if you just think they can and
concentrate on how to do it. But if you think the obstacles are
unsurmountable, you will not of course try, and even if you do,
it will be in only a half-hearted way--a way that accomplishes
nothing.

Many men will not begin an undertaking unless they feel sure they
will succeed in it. What a mistake! This would be right, if we
were sure of what we could and could not do. But who knows? There
may be an obstruction there now that might not be there next
week. There may not be an obstruction there now that will be
there next week. The trouble with most persons is that just as
soon as they see their way blocked they lose courage. They forget
that usually there is a way around the difficulty. It's up to you
to find it. If you tackle something with little effort, when the
conditions call for a big effort, you will of course not win.
Tackle everything with a feeling that you will utilize all the
power within you to make it a success. This is the kind of
concentrated effort that succeeds.

Most people are beaten before they start. They think they are
going to encounter obstacles, and they look for them instead of
for means to overcome them. The result is that they increase
their obstacles instead of diminishing them. Have you ever
undertaken something that you thought would be hard, but
afterwards found it to be easy? That is the way a great many
times. The things that look difficult in advance turn out to be
easy of conquest when once encountered. So start out on your
journey with the idea that the road is going to be clear for you,
and that if it is not you will clear the way. All men that have
amounted to anything have cleared their way and they did not have
the assistance that you will have today.

The one great keynote of success is to do whatever you have
decided on. Don't be turned from your path, but resolve that you
are going to accomplish what you set out to do. Don't be
frightened at a few rebuffs, for they cannot stop the man that is
determined--the man that knows in his heart that success is only
bought by tremendous resolution, by concentrated and
whole-hearted effort.

"He who has a firm will," says Goethe, "molds the world to
himself."

"People do not lack strength," says Victor Hugo; "they lack
Will."

It is not so much skill that wins victories as it is activity and
great determination There is no such thing as failure for the man
that does his best. No matter what you may be working at, at the
present time, don't let this make you lose courage. The tides are
continually changing, and tomorrow or some other day they will
turn to your advantage if you are a willing and are an ambitious
worker. There is nothing that develops you and increases your
courage like work. If it were not for work how monotonous life
would at last become!

So I say to the man that wants to advance, "Don't look upon your
present position as your permanent one. Keep your eyes open, and
add those qualities to your makeup that will assist you when your
opportunity comes. Be ever alert and on the watch for
opportunities. Remember, we attract what we set our minds on. If
we look for opportunities, we find them.

If you are the man you should be, some one is looking for you to
fill a responsible position. So when he finds you, don't let your
attention wander. Give it all to him. Show that you can
concentrate your powers, that you have the makeup of a real man.
Show no signs of fear, uncertainty or doubt. The man that is sure
of himself is bound to get to the front. No circumstances can
prevent him.



LESSON XIV. THE ART OF CONCENTRATING BY MEANS OF PRACTICAL
EXERCISES

Select some thought, and see how long you can hold your mind on
it. It is well to have a clock at first and keep track of the
time. If you decide to think about health, you can get a great
deal of good from your thinking besides developing concentration.
Think of health as being the greatest blessing there is, in the
world. Don't let any other thought drift in. Just the moment one
starts to obtrude, make it get out.

Make it a daily habit of concentrating on this thought for, say,
ten minutes. Practice until you can hold it to the exclusion of
everything else. You will find it of the greatest value to
centralize your thoughts on health. Regardless of your present
condition, see yourself as you would like to be and be blind to
everything else. You will find it hard at first to forget your
ailments, if you have any, but after a short while you can shut
out these negative thoughts and see yourself as you want to be.
Each time you concentrate you form a more perfect image of
health, and, as you come into its realization, you become
healthy, strong and wholesome.

I want to impress upon your mind that the habit of forming mental
images is of the greatest value. It has always been used by
successful men of all ages, but few realize its full importance.

Do you know that you are continually acting according to the
images you form? If you allow yourself to mould negative images
you unconsciously build a negative disposition. You will think of
poverty, weakness, disease, fear, etc. Just as surely as you
think of these will your objective life express itself in a like
way. Just what we think, we will manifest in the external world.

In deep concentration you become linked with the great creative
spirit of the universe, and the creative energy then flows
through you, vitalizing your creations into form. In deep
concentration your mind becomes attuned with the infinite and
registers the cosmic intelligence and receives its messages. You
become so full of the cosmic energy that you are literally
flooded with divine power. This is a most desired state. It is
then we realize the advantages of being connected with the
supra-consciousness. The supra-consciousness registers the higher
cosmic vibrations. It is often referred to as the wireless
station, the message recorded coming from the universal mind.

There are very few that reach this stage of concentration. Very
few even know that it is possible. They think concentration means
limitation to one subject, but this deeper concentration that
brings us into harmony with the Infinite is that which produces
and maintains health.

When you have once come in contact with your supra-consciousness
you become the controller of your human thoughts. That which
comes to you is higher than human thoughts. It is often spoken of
as Cosmic Consciousness. Once it is experienced it is never
forgotten. Naturally it requires a good deal of training to reach
this state, but once you do, it becomes easier each time to do,
and in the course of time you can become possessed of power which
was unknown to you before. You are able to direct the expression
of almost Infinite Power while in this deeper state of
concentration.

Exercises In Concentration. The rays of the sun, when focused
upon an object by means of a sun glass, produce a heat many times
greater than the scattered rays of the same source of light and
heat. This is true of attention. Scatter it and you get but
ordinary results. But center it upon one thing and you secure
much better results. When you focus your attention upon an object
your every action, voluntary and involuntary, is in the direction
of attaining that object. If you will focus your energies upon a
thing to the exclusion of everything else, you generate the force
that can bring you what you want.

When you focus your thought, you increase its strength. The
exercises that follow are tedious and monotonous, but useful. If
you will persist in them you will find they are very valuable, as
they increase your powers of concentration.

Before proceeding with the exercises I will answer a question
that just comes to me. This person says after he works all day he
is too tired to practice any exercise. But this is not true. We
will say he comes home all tired out, eats his supper and sits
down to rest. If his work has been mental, the thought which has
been occupying his mind returns to him and this prevents him from
securing the rest he needs.

It is an admitted fact that certain thoughts call into operation
a certain set of brain cells; the other cells, of course, are not
busy at that time and are rested. Now if you take up something
that is just different from what you have been doing during the
day, you will use the cells that have not done anything and give
those that have had work to do a rest. So you should regulate the
evenings that you have and call forth an entirely different line
of thought so as not to use the cells which you have tired out
during the day. If you will center your attention on a new
thought, you relieve the old cells from vibrating with excitement
and they get their needed rest. The other cells that have been
idle all day want to work, and you will find you can enjoy your
evenings while securing needed rest.

When once you have learned to master your thoughts, you will be
able to change them just as easily as you change your clothes.

Remember, the real requisite of centering is to be able to shut
out outside thoughts--anything foreign to the subject. Now, in
order to control your intention first gain control over the body.
This must be brought under direct control of the mind; the mind
under the control of the will. Your will is strong enough to do
anything you wish, but you must realize that it is. The mind can
be greatly strengthened by being brought under the direct
influence of the will. When the mind is properly strengthened by
the impulse of the will it becomes a more powerful transmitter of
thought, because it has more force.

The Best Time to Concentrate Is after reading something that is
inspiring, as you are then mentally and spiritually exalted in
the desired realm. Then is the time you are ready for deep
concentration. If you are in your room first see that your
windows are up and the air is good. Lie down flat on your bed
without a pillow. See that every muscle is relaxed. Now breathe
slowly, filling the lungs comfortably full of fresh air; hold
this as long as you can without straining yourself; then exhale
slowly. Exhale in an easy, rhythmic way. Breathe this way for
five minutes, letting the Divine Breath flow through you, which
will cleanse and rejuvenate every cell of brain and body.

You are then ready to proceed. Now think how quiet and relaxed
you are. You can become enthusiastic over your condition. Just
think of yourself as getting ready to receive knowledge that is
far greater than you have ever received before. Now relax and let
the spirit work in and through you and assist you to accomplish
what you wish.

Don't let any doubts or fears enter. Just feel that what you wish
is going to manifest. Just feel it already has, in reality it
has, for just the minute you wish a thing to be done it manifests
in the thought world. Whenever you concentrate just believe it is
a success. Keep up this feeling and allow nothing to interfere
and you will soon find you have become the master of
concentration. You will find that this practice will be of
wonderful value to you, and that rapidly you will be learning to
accomplish anything that you undertake.

It will be necessary to first train the body to obey the commands
of the mind. I want you to gain control of your muscular
movements. The following exercise is especially good in assisting
you to acquire perfect control of the muscles.


Exercise 1

Sit in a comfortable chair and see how still you can keep. This
is not as easy as it seems. You will have to center your
attention on sitting still. Watch and see that you are not making
any involuntary muscular movements. By a little practice you will
find you are able to sit still without a movement of the muscles
for fifteen minutes. At first I advise sitting in a relaxed
position for five minutes. After you are able to keep perfectly
still, increase the time to ten minutes and then to fifteen. This
is as long as it is necessary. But never strain yourself to keep
still. You must be relaxed completely. You will find this habit
of relaxing is very good.


Exercise 2

Sit in a chair with your head up and your chin out, shoulders
back. Raise your right arm until it is on the level with your
shoulder, pointing to your right. Look around, with head only,
and fix your gaze on your fingers, and keep the arm perfectly
still for one minute. Do the same exercise with left arm. When
you are able to keep the arm perfectly steady, increase the time
until you are able to do this five minutes with each arm. Turn
the palm of the hand downward when it is outstretched, as this is
the easiest position. If you will keep your eyes fixed on the
tips of the fingers you will be able to tell if you are keeping
your arm perfectly still.


Exercise 3

Fill a small glass full of water, and grasp it by the fingers;
put the arm directly in front of you. Now fix the eyes upon the
glass and try to keep the arm so steady that no movement will be
noticeable. Do this first for one moment and then increase it to
five. Do the exercise with first one arm and then the other.


Exercise 4

Watch yourself during the day and see that your muscles do not
become tense or strained. See how easy and relaxed you can keep
yourself. See how poised you can be at all times. Cultivate a
self-poised manner, instead of a nervous, strained appearance.
This mental feeling will improve your carriage and demeanor. Stop
all useless gestures and movements of the body. These mean that
you have not proper control over your body. After you have
acquired this control, notice how "ill-at-ease" people are that
have not gained this control. I have just been sizing up a
salesman that has just left me. Part of his body kept moving all
the time. I just felt like saying to him, "Do you know how much
better appearance you would make if you would just learn to speak
with your voice instead of trying to express what you say with
your whole body?" Just watch those that interview you and see how
they lack poise.

Get rid of any habit you have of twitching or jerking any part of
your body. You will find you make many involuntary movements. You
can quickly stop any of these by merely centering your attention
on the thought, "I will not."

If you are in the habit of letting noises upset you, just
exercise control; when the door slams, or something falls, etc.,
just think of these as exercises in self-control. You will find
many exercises like this in your daily routine.

The purpose of the above exercises is to gain control over the
involuntary muscular movement, making your actions entirely
voluntary. The following exercises are arranged to bring your
voluntary muscles under the control of the will, so that your
mental forces may control your muscular movements.


Exercise 5

Move your chair up to a table, placing your hands upon it,
clenching the fists, keeping the back of the hand on the table,
the thumb doubled over the fingers. Now fix your gaze upon the
fist for a while, then gradually extend the thumb, keeping your
whole attention fixed upon the act, just as if it was a matter of
great importance. Then gradually extend your first finger, then
your second and so on until you open the rest. Then reverse the
process, closing first the last one opened and then the rest, and
finally you will have the fist again in the original position
with the thumb closed over the finger. Do this exercise with the
left hand. Keep up this exercise first with one hand and then the
other until you have done it five times with each hand. In a few
days you can increase it to ten times.

The chances are that the above exercises will at first make you
"tired," but it is important for you to practice these monotonous
exercises so you can train your attention. It also gives you
control over your muscular movement. The attention, of course,
must be kept closely on each movement of the hand; if it is not,
you of course lose the value of the exercise.


Exercise 6

Put the right hand on knee, both fingers and thumb closed, except
the first finger, which points out in front of you. Then move the
finger slowly from side to side, keeping the attention fixed upon
the end of the finger. You can make up a variety of exercises
like these. It is good training to plan out different ones. The
main point you should keep in mind is that the exercise should be
simple and that the attention should be firmly fixed upon the
moving part of the body. You will find your attention will not
want to be controlled and will try to drift to something more
interesting. This is just where these exercises are of value, and
you must control your attention and see it is held in the right
place and does not wander away.

You may think these exercises very simple and of no value, but I
promise you in a short time you will notice that you have a much
better control over your muscular movements, carriage and
demeanor, and you will find that you have greatly improved your
power of attention, and can center your thoughts on what you do,
which of course will be very valuable.

No matter what you may be doing, imagine that it is your chief
object in life. Imagine you are not interested in anything else
in the world but what you are doing. Do not let your attention
get away from the work you are at. Your attention will no doubt
be rebellious, but control it and do not let it control you. When
once you conquer the rebellious attention you have achieved a
greater victory than you can realize at the time. Many times
afterwards you will be thankful you have learned to concentrate
your closest attention upon the object at hand.

Let no day go by without practicing concentrating on some
familiar object that is uninteresting. Never choose an
interesting object, as it requires less attention. The less
interesting it is the better exercise will it be. After a little
practice you will find you can center your attention on
uninteresting subjects at will.

The person that can concentrate can gain full control over his
body and mind and be the master of his inclinations; not their
slave. When you can control yourself you can control others. You
can develop a Will that will make you a giant compared with the
man that lacks Will Power. Try out your Will Power in different
ways until you have it under such control that just as soon as
you decide to do a thing you go ahead and do it. Never be
satisfied with the "I did fairly well" spirit, but put forward
your best efforts. Be satisfied with nothing else. When you have
gained this you are the man you were intended to be.


Exercise 7

Concentration Increases the Sense of Smell. When you take a walk,
or drive in the country, or pass a flower garden, concentrate on
the odor of flowers and plants. See how many different kinds you
can detect. Then choose one particular kind and try to sense only
this. You will find that this strongly intensifies the sense of
smell. This differentiation requires, however, a peculiarly
attentive attitude. When sense of smell is being developed, you
should not only shut out from the mind every thought but that of
odor, but you should also shut out cognizance of every odor save
that upon which your mind, for the time, is concentrated.

You call find plenty of opportunity for exercises for developing
the sense of smell. When you are out in the air, be on the alert
for the different odors. You will find the air laden with all
kinds, but let your concentration upon the one selected be such
that a scent of its fragrance in after years will vividly recall
the circumstances of this exercise.

The object of these exercises is to develop concentrated
attention, and you will find that you can, through their
practice, control your mind and direct your thoughts just the
same as you can your arm.


Exercise 8

Concentration on the Within. Lie down and thoroughly relax your
muscles. Concentrate on the beating of your heart. Do not pay any
attention to anything else. Think how this great organ is pumping
the blood to every part of the body; try to actually picture the
blood leaving the great reservoir and going in one stream right
down to the toes. Picture another going down the arms to the tips
of the fingers. After a little practice you can actually feel the
blood passing through your system.

If, at any time, you feel weak in any part of the body, will that
an extra supply of blood shall go there. For instance, if your
eyes feel tired, picture the blood coming from the heart, passing
up through the head and out to the eyes. You can wonderfully
increase your strength by this exercise. Men have been able to
gain such control over the heart that they have actually stopped
it from beating for five minutes. This, however, is not without
danger, and is not to be practiced by the novice.

I have found the following a very helpful exercise to take just
before going to bed and on rising in the morning: Say to
yourself, "Every cell in my body thrills with life; every part of
my body is strong and healthy." I have known a number of people
to greatly improve their health in this way. You become what you
picture yourself to be. If your mind thinks of sickness in
connection with self you will be sick. If you imagine yourself in
strong, vigorous health, the image will be realized. You will be
healthy.


Exercise 9

Concentrating on Sleep. What is known as the water method is,
although very simple, very effective in inducing sleep.

Put a full glass of clear water on a table in your sleeping room.
Sit in a chair beside the table and gaze into the glass of water
and think how calm it is. Then picture yourself , getting into
just as calm a state. In a short time you will find the nerves
becoming quiet and you will be able to go to sleep. Sometimes it
is good to picture yourself becoming drowsy to induce sleep, and,
again, the most persistent insomnia has been overcome by one
thinking of himself as some inanimate object--for instance, a
hollow log in the depths of the cool, quiet forest.

Those who are troubled with insomnia will find these sleep
exercises that quiet the nerves very effective. Just keep the
idea in your mind that there is no difficulty in going to sleep;
banish all fear of insomnia. Practice these exercises and you
will sleep.

By this time you should have awakened to the possibilities of
concentration and have become aware of the important part it
plays in your life.


Exercise 10

Concentration Will Save Energy and Appearance. Watch yourself and
see if you are not in the habit of moving your hands, thumping
something with your fingers or twirling your mustache. Some have
the habit of keeping their feet going, as, for instance, tapping
them on the floor. Practice standing before a mirror and see if
you are in the habit of frowning or causing wrinkles to appear in
the forehead. Watch others and see how they needlessly twist
their faces in talking. Any movement of the face that causes the
skin to wrinkle will eventually cause a permanent wrinkle. As the
face is like a piece of silk, you can make a fold in it a number
of times and it will straighten out of itself, but, if you
continue to make a fold in it, it will in time be impossible to
remove it.

By Concentration You Can Stop the Worry Habit. If you are in the
habit of worrying over the merest trifles, just concentrate on
this a few minutes and see bow needless it is; if you are also in
the habit of becoming irritable or nervous at the least little
thing, check yourself instantly when you feel yourself becoming
so; start to breathe deeply; say, "I will not be so weak; I am
master of myself," and you will quickly overcome your condition.


Exercise 11

By Concentration You Can Control Your Temper. If you are one of
those that flare up at the slightest "provocation" and never try
to control yourself, just think this over a minute. Does it do
you any good? Do you gain anything by it? Doesn't it put you out
of poise for some time? Don't you know that this grows on you and
will eventually make you despised by all that have any dealings
with you? Everyone makes mistakes and, instead of becoming angry
at their perpetrators, just say to them, "Be more careful next
time." This thought will be impressed on them and they will be
more careful. But, if you continually complain about their making
a mistake, the thought of a mistake is impressed on them and they
will be more likely to make mistakes in the future. All lack of
self-control can be conquered if you will but learn to
concentrate.

Many of you that read this may think you are not guilty of either
of these faults, but if you will carefully watch yourself you
will probably find that you are, and, if so, you will be greatly
helped by repeating this affirmation each morning:

"I am going to try today not to make a useless gesture or to
worry over trifles, or become nervous or irritable. I intend to
be calm, and, no difference what may be the circumstances, I will
control myself. Henceforth I resolve to be free from all signs
that show lack of self-control."

At night quickly review your actions during the day and see how
fully you realized your aim. At first you will, of course, have
to plead guilty of violation a few times, but keep on, and you
will soon find that you can live up to your ideal. After you have
once gained self-control, however, don't relinquish it. For some
time it will still be necessary to repeat the affirmation in the
morning and square your conduct with it in the evening. Keep up
the good work until, at last, the habit of self-control is so
firmly fixed that you could not break it even though you tried.

I have had many persons tell me that this affirmation and daily
review made a wonderful difference in their lives. You, too, will
notice the difference if you live up to these instructions.


Exercise 12.

Practice Talking Before a Glass. Make two marks on your mirror on
a level with your eyes, and think of them as two human eyes
looking into yours. Your eyes will probably blink a little at
first. Do not move your head, but stand erect. Concentrate all
your thoughts on keeping your head perfectly still. Do not let
another thought come into your mind. Then, still keeping the
head, eyes and body still, think that you look like a reliable
man or woman should; like a person that anyone would have
confidence in. Do not let your appearance be such as to justify
the remark, "I don't like his appearance. I don't believe he can
be trusted."

While standing before the mirror practice deep breathing. See
that there is plenty of fresh air in the room, and that you are
literally feasting on it. You will find that, as it permeates
every cell, your timidity will disappear. It has been replaced by
a sense of peace and power.

The one that stands up like a man and has control over the
muscles of his face and eyes always commands attention. In his
conversation, he can better impress those with whom he comes in
contact. He acquires a feeling of calmness and strength that
causes opposition to melt away before it.

Three minutes a day is long enough for the practice of this
exercise.

Look at the clock before you commence the exercise, and if you
find you can prolong the exercise for more than five minutes do
so. The next day sit in a chair and, without looking at the
picture, concentrate on it and see if you cannot think of
additional details concerning it. The chances are you will be
able to think of many more. It might be well for you to write
down all you thought of the first day, and then add to the list
each new discovery. You will find that this is a very excellent
exercise in concentration.


Exercise 13

The Control of Sensations. Think how you would feel if you were
cool; then how you would feel if you were cold; again, how you
would feel if it were freezing. In this state you would be
shivering all over. Now think of just the opposite conditions;
construct such a vivid image of heat that you are able to
experience the sensation of heat even in the coldest atmosphere.
It is possible to train your imagination until you do this, and
it can then be turned to practical account in making undesirable
conditions bearable.

You can think of many very good exercises like this. For
instance, if you feel yourself getting hungry or thirsty and for
any reason you do not wish to eat, do not think of how hungry or
thirsty you are, but just visualize yourself as finishing a
hearty meal. Again, when you experience pain, do not increase it
by thinking about it, but do something to divert your attention,
and the pain will seem to decrease. If you will start practicing
along this line systematically you will soon gain a wonderful
control over the things that affect your physical comfort.


Exercise 14

The Eastern Way of Concentrating. Sit in a chair with a high back
in upright position. Press one finger against the right nostril.
Now take a long, deep breath, drawing the breath in gently as you
count ten; then expel the breath through the right nostril as you
count ten. Repeat this exercise with the opposite nostril. This
exercise should be done at least twenty times at each sitting.


Exercise 15

Controlling Desires. Desire, which is one of the hardest forces
to control, will furnish you with excellent exercises in
concentration. It seems natural to want to tell others what you
know; but, by learning to control these desires, you can
wonderfully strengthen your powers of concentration. Remember,
you have all you can do to attend to your own business. Do not
waste your time in thinking of others or in gossiping about them.

If, from your own observation, you learn something about another
person that is detrimental, keep it to yourself. Your opinion may
afterwards turn out to be wrong anyway, but whether right or
wrong, you have strengthened your will by controlling your desire
to communicate your views.

If you hear good news resist the desire to tell it to the first
person you meet and you will be benefited thereby. It will
require the concentration of all your powers of resistance to
prohibit the desire to tell. After you feel that you have
complete control over your desires you can then tell your news.
But you must be able to suppress the desire to communicate the
news until you are fully ready to tell it. Persons that do not
possess this power of control over desires are apt to tell things
that they should not, thereby often involving both themselves and
others in needless trouble.

If you are in the habit of getting excited when you hear
unpleasant news, just control yourself and receive it without any
exclamation of surprise. Say to yourself, "Nothing is going to
cause me to lose my self-control. You will find from experience
that this self-control will be worth much to you in business. You
will be looked upon as a cool-headed business man, and this in
time becomes a valuable business asset. Of course, circumstances
alter cases. At times it is necessary to become enthused. But be
ever on the lookout for opportunities for the practice of
self-control. "He that ruleth his spirit is greater than he that
ruleth a city."


Exercise 16

When You Read. No one can think without first concentrating his
thoughts on the subject in hand. Every man and woman should train
himself to think clearly. An excellent exercise is to read some
short story and then write just an abridged statement. Read an
article in a newspaper, and see in how few words you can express
it. Reading an article to get only the essentials requires the
closest concentration. If you are unable to write out what you
read, you will know you are weak in concentration. Instead of
writing it out you can express it orally if you wish. Go to your
room and deliver it as if you were talking to some one. You will
find exercises like this of the greatest value in developing
concentration and learning to think.

After you have practiced a number of these simple exercises read
a book for twenty minutes and then write down what you have read.
The chances are that at first you will not remember very many
details, but with a little practice you will be able to write a
very good account of what you have read. The closer the
concentration the more accurate the account will be.

It is a good idea when time is limited to read only a short
sentence and then try to write it down word for word. When you
are able to do this, read two or more sentences and treat
similarly. The practice will produce very good results if you
keep it up until the habit is fixed.

If you will just utilize your spare time in practicing exercises
like those suggested you can gain wonderful powers of
concentration. You will find that in order to remember every word
in a sentence you must keep out every thought but that which you
wish to remember, and this power of inhibition alone will more
than compensate for the trouble of the exercise. Of course,
success in all of the above depends largely upon cultivating,
through the closest concentration, the power to image or picture
what you read; upon the power, as one writer expresses it, of
letting the mountains of which we hear loom before us and the
rivers of which we read roll at our feet.


Exercise 17

Concentration Overcomes Bad Habits. If you have a habit that you
want to get rid of, shut your eyes and imagine that your real
self is standing before you. Now try the power of affirmation;
say to yourself, "You are not a weakling; you can stop this habit
if you want to. This habit is bad and you want to break it." Just
imagine that you are some one else giving this advice. This is
very valuable practice. You, in time, see yourself as others see
you. The habit loses its power over you and you are free.

If you will just form the mental image of controlling yourself as
another person might, you will take a delight in breaking bad
habits. I have known a number of men to break themselves of
drinking in this way.


Exercise 18

Watch Concentration. Sit in a chair and place a clock with a
second hand on the table. Follow the second hand with your eyes
as it goes around. Keep this up for five minutes, thinking of
nothing else but the second hand, This is a very good exercise
when you only have a few minutes to spare, if you are able to
keep every other thought in the stream of consciousness
subordinate to it. As there is little that is particularly
interesting about the second hand, it is hard to do this, but in
the extra effort of will power required to make it successful
lies its value. Always try to keep as still as possible during
these exercises.

In this way you can gain control over nerves and this quieting
effect is very good for them.


Exercise 19

Faith Concentration. A belief in the power to concentrate is of
course very important. I purposely did not put this exercise in
the beginning where it naturally belongs because I wanted you to
know that you could learn to concentrate. If you have practiced
the above exercises you have now developed this concentration
power to a considerable extent and therefore you have faith in
the power of concentration, but you can still become a much
stronger believer in it.

We will say that you have some desire or wish you want fulfilled,
or that you need some special advice. You first clearly picture
what is wanted and then you concentrate on getting it. Have
absolute faith that your desires will be realized. Believe that
it will according to your belief be fulfilled. Never, at this
time, attempt to analyze the belief. You don't care anything
about the whys and wherefores. You want to gain the thing you
desire, and if you concentrate on it in the right way you will
get it.

A Caution. Never think you will not succeed, but picture what is
wanted as already yours, and yours it surely will be.


Self-Distrust. Do you ever feel distrust in yourself? If You do,
just ask yourself, which self do I mistrust? Then say: my higher
self cannot be affected. Then think of the wonderful powers of
the higher self. There is a way to overcome all difficulties, and
it is a delight for the human soul to do so. Instead of wasting
precious thought-force by dreading or fearing a disagreeable
interview or event, instead devote the time and concentrated
thought in how to make the best of the interview or event and you
will find that it will not be as unpleasant as you thought it
would be. Most of our troubles are but imaginary, and it is the
mental habit of so dreading them that really acts as a magnet in
attracting those that really do come. Your evil circumstances are
created or attracted by your own negative, fears and wrong
thoughts, and are a means of teaching you to triumph over all
evils, by discovering that which is inherent within yourself.

You will find it helpful in overcoming self-distrust, to stop and
think, why you are, concentrating your forces, and by so doing
you become more closely attached to the higher self, which never
distrusts.



LESSON XV. CONCENTRATE SO YOU WILL NOT FORGET

A man forgets because he does not concentrate his mind on his
purpose, especially at the moment he conceives it. We remember
only that which makes a deep impression, hence we must first
deepen our impressions by associating in our minds certain ideas
that are related to them.

We will say a wife gives her husband a letter to mail. He does
not think about it, but automatically puts it in his pocket and
forgets all about it. When the letter was given to him had he
said to himself, "I will mail this letter. The box is at the next
corner and when I pass it I must drop this letter," it would have
enabled him to recall the letter the instant he reached the mail
box.

The same rule holds good in regard to more important things. For
example, if you are instructed to drop in and see Mr. Smith while
out to luncheon today, you will not forget it, if, at the moment
the instruction is given, you say to yourself something similar
to the following:

"When I get to the corner of Blank street, on my way to luncheon,
I shall turn to the right and call on Mr. Smith." In this way the
impression is made, the connection established and the sight of
the associated object recalls the errand.

The important thing to do is to deepen the impression at the very
moment it enters your mind. This is made possible, not only by
concentrating the mind upon the idea itself, but by surrounding
it with all possible association of ideas, so that each one will
reinforce the others.

The mind is governed by laws of association, such as the law that
ideas which enter the mind at the same time emerge at the same
time, one assisting in recalling the others.

The reason why people cannot remember what they want to is that
they have not concentrated their minds sufficiently on their
purpose at the moment when it was formed.

You can train yourself to remember in this way by the
concentration of the attention on your purpose, in accordance
with the laws of association.

When once you form this habit, the attention is easily centered
and the memory easily trained. Then your memory, instead of
failing you at crucial moments, becomes a valuable asset in your
every-day work.

Exercise in Memory Concentration. Select some picture; put it on
a table and then look at it for two minutes. Concentrate your
attention on this picture, observe every detail; then shut your
eyes and see how much you can recall about it. Think of what the
picture represents; whether it is a good subject; whether it
looks natural. Think of objects in foreground, middle ground,
background; of details of color and form. Now open your eyes and
hold yourself rigidly to the correction of each and every
mistake. Close eyes again and notice how much more accurate your
picture is. Practice until your mental image corresponds in every
particular to the original.


Nature is a Wonderful Instructor. But there are very few who
realize that when we get in touch with nature we discover
ourselves. That by listening to her voice, with that curious,
inner sense of ours, we learn the oneness of life and wake up to
our own latent powers.

Few realize that the simple act of listening and concentrating is
our best interior power, for it brings us into close contact with
the highest, just as our other senses bring us into touch with
the coarser side of human nature. The closer we live to nature
the more developed is this sense. "So called" civilization has
over developed our other senses at the expense of this one.

Children unconsciously realize the value of concentration--for
instance: When a Child has a difficult problem to solve, and gets
to some knotty point which he finds himself mentally unable to
do--though he tries his hardest--he will pause and keep quite
still, leaning on his elbow, apparently listening; then you will
see, if you are watching, sudden illumination come and he goes on
happily and accomplishes his task. A child instinctively but
unconsciously knows when he needs help, he must be quiet and
concentrate.

All great people concentrate and owe their success to it. The
doctor thinks over the symptoms of his patient, waits, listens
for the inspiration, though quite unconscious, perhaps, of doing
so. The one who diagnoses in this way seldom makes mistakes. An
author thinks his plot, holds it in his mind, and then waits, and
illumination comes. If you want to be able to solve difficult
problems you must learn to do the same.



LESSON XVI. HOW CONCENTRATION CAN FULFILL YOUR DESIRE

"It is a spiritual law that the desire to do necessarily implies
the ability to do."

You have all read of "Aladdin's Lamp," which accomplished such
wonderful things. This, of course, is only a fairy story, but it
illustrates the fact that man has within him the power, if he is
able to use it, to gratify his every wish.

If you are unable to satisfy your deepest longings it is time you
learned how to use your God-given powers. You will soon be
conscious that you have latent powers within capable when once
developed of revealing to you priceless knowledge and unlimited
possibilities of success.

Man should have plenty of everything and not merely substance to
live on as so many have. All natural desires can be realized. It
would be wrong for the Infinite to create wants that could not be
supplied. Man's very soul is in his power to think, and it,
therefore, is the essence of all created things. Every instinct
of man leads to thought, and in every thought there is great
possibility because true thought development, when allied to
those mysterious powers which perhaps transcend it, has been the
cause of all the world's true progress.

In the silence we become conscious of "that something" which
transcends thought and which uses thought as a medium for
expression. Many have glimpses of "that something," but few ever
reach the state where the mind is steady enough to fathom these
depths. Silent, concentrated thought is more potent than spoken
words, for speech distracts from the focusing power of the mind
by drawing more and more attention to the without.

Man must learn more and more to depend on himself; to seek more
for the Infinite within. It is from this source alone that he
ever gains the power to solve his practical difficulties. No one
should give up when there is always the resources of Infinity.
The cause of failure is that men search in the wrong direction
for success, because they are not conscious of their real powers
that when used are capable of guiding them.

The Infinite within is foreign to those persons who go through
life without developing their spiritual powers. But the Infinite
helps only he who helps himself. There is no such thing as a
Special "Providence." Man will not receive help from the Infinite
except to the extent that he believes and hopes and prays for
help from this great source.

Concentrate on What You Want and Get It. The weakling is
controlled by conditions. The strong man controls conditions. You
can be either the conqueror or the conquered. By the law of
concentration you can achieve your heart's desire. This law is so
powerful that that which at first seems impossible becomes
attainable.

By this law what you at first see as a dream becomes a reality.

Remember that the first step in concentration is to form a Mental
Image of what you wish to accomplish. This image becomes a
thought-seed that attracts thoughts of a similar nature. Around
this thought, when it is once planted in the imagination or
creative region of the mind, you group or build associated
thoughts which continue to grow as long as your desire is keen
enough to compel close concentration.

Form the habit of thinking of something you wish to accomplish
for five minutes each day. Shut every other thought out of
consciousness. Be confident that you will succeed; make up your
mind that all obstacles that are in your way will be overcome and
you can rise above any environment.

You do this by utilizing the natural laws of the thought world
which are all powerful.

A great aid in the development of concentration is to write out
your thoughts on that which lies nearest your heart and to
continue, little by little, to add to it until you have as nearly
as possible exhausted the subject.

You will find that each day as you focus your forces on this
thought at the center of the stream of consciousness, new plans,
ideas and methods will flash into your mind. There is a law of
attraction that will help you accomplish your purpose. An
advertiser, for instance, gets to thinking along a certain line.
He has formed his own ideas, but he wants to know what others
think. He starts out to seek ideas and he soon finds plenty of
books, plans, designs, etc., on the subject, although when he
started he was not aware of their existence.

The same thing is true in all lines. We can attract those things
that will help us. Very often we seem to receive help in a
miraculous way. It may be slow in coming, but once the silent
unseen forces are put into operation, they will bring results so
long as we do our part. They are ever present and ready to aid
those who care to use them. By forming a strong mental image of
your desire, you plant the thought-seed which begins working in
your interest and, in time, that desire, if in harmony with your
higher nature, will materialize.

It may seem that it would be unnecessary to caution you to
concentrate only upon achievement that will be good for you and
work no harm to another, but there are many who forget others and
their rights, in their anxiety to achieve success. All good
things are possible for you to have, but only as you bring your
forces into harmony with that law that requires that we mete out
justice to fellow travelers as we journey along life's road. So
first think over the thing wanted and if it would be good for you
to have; say, "I want to do this; I am going to work to secure
it. The way will be open for me."

If you fully grasp mentally the thought of success and hold it in
mind each day, you gradually make a pattern or mold which in time
will materialize. But by all means keep free from doubt and fear,
the destructive forces. Never allow these to become associated
with your thoughts.

At last you will create the desired conditions and receive help
in many unlooked-for ways that will lift you out of the undesired
environment. Life will then seem very different to you, for you
will have found happiness through awakening within yourself the
power to become the master of circumstances instead of their
slave.

To the beginner in this line of thought some of the things stated
in this book may sound strange, even absurd, but, instead of
condemning them, give them a trial. You will find they will work
out.

The inventor has to work out his idea mentally before he produces
it materially. The architect first sees the mental picture of the
house he is to plan and from this works out the one we see. Every
object, every enterprise, must first be mentally created.

I know a man that started in business with thirteen cents and not
a dollar's worth of credit. In ten years he has built up a large
and profitable business. He attributes his success to two
things--belief that he would succeed and hard work. There were
times when it did not look like he could weather the storm. He
was being pressed by his creditors who considered him bankrupt.
They would have taken fifty cents on the dollar for his notes and
considered themselves lucky. But by keeping up a bold front he
got an extension of time when needed. When absolutely necessary
for him to raise a certain sum at a certain time he always did
it. When he had heavy bills to meet he would make up his mind
that certain people that owed him would pay by a certain date and
they always did. Sometimes he would not receive their check until
the last mail of the day of the extension, and I have known him
to send out a check with the prospect of receiving a check from
one of his customers the following day. He would have no reason
other than his belief in the power of affecting the mind of
another by concentration of thought for expecting that check, but
rarely has he been disappointed.

Just put forth the necessary concentrated effort and you will be
wonderfully helped from sources unknown to you.

Remember the mystical words of Jesus, the Master: "Whatsoever
thing ye desire when ye pray, pray as if ye had already received
and ye shall have."



LESSON XVII. IDEALS DEVELOPED BY CONCENTRATION

 Through our paltry stir and strife, Glows the wished Ideal, And
longing molds in clay, what life Carves in the marble
real.--Lowell.


We often hear people spoken of as idealists. The fact is we are
all idealists to a certain extent, and upon the ideals we picture
depends our ultimate success. You must have the mental image if
you are to produce the material thing. Everything is first
created in the mind. When you control your thoughts you become a
creator. You receive divine ideas and shape them to your
individual needs. All things of this world are to you just what
you think they are. Your happiness and success depend upon your
ideals.

You are responsible for every condition you go through, either
consciously or unconsciously. The next step you take determines
the succeeding step. Remember this; it is a valuable lesson. By
concentrating on each step as you go along, you can save a lot of
waste steps and will be able to choose a straight path instead of
a roundabout road.

Concentrate Upon Your Ideals and They Will Become Material
Actualities. Through concentration we work out our ideals in
physical life. Your future depends upon the ideals you are
forming now. Your past ideals are determining your present.
Therefore, if you want a bright future, you must begin to prepare
for it today.

If persons could only realize that they can only injure
themselves, that when they are apparently injuring others they
are really injuring themselves, what a different world this would
be!

We say a man is as changeable as the weather. What is meant is
his ideals change. Every time you change your ideal you think
differently. You become like a rudderless boat on an ocean.
Therefore realize the importance of holding to your ideal until
it becomes a reality.

You get up in the morning determined that nothing will make you
lose your temper. This is your ideal of a person of real strength
and poise. Something takes place that upsets you completely and
you lose your temper. For the time being you forget your ideal.
If you had just thought a second of what a well-poised person
implies you would not have become angry. You lose your poise when
you forget your ideal. Each time we allow our ideals to be
shattered we also weaken our will-power. Holding to your ideals
develops will-power. Don't forget this.

Why do so many men fail? Because they don't hold to their ideal
until it becomes a mental habit. When they concentrate on it to
the exclusion of all other things it becomes a reality.

"I am that which I think myself to be."

Ideals are reflected to us from the unseen spirit. The laws of
matter and spirit are not the same. One can be broken, but not
the other. To the extent that ideals are kept is your future
assured.

It was never intended that man should suffer. He has brought it
upon himself by disobeying the laws of nature. He knows them so
cannot plead ignorance. Why does he break them? Because he does
not pay attention to those ideals flashed to him from the
Infinite Spirit.

Life is but one continuous unfoldment, and you can be happy every
step of the way or miserable, as you please; it all depends upon
how we entertain those silent whisperings that come from we know
not where. We cannot hear them with mortal ear, but from the
silence they come as if they were dreams, not to you or me alone,
but to everyone. In this way the grandest thoughts come to us, to
use or abuse. So search not in treasured volumes for noble
thoughts, but within, and bright and glowing vision will come to
be realized now and hereafter.


You must give some hours to concentrated, consistent, persistent
thought. You must study yourself and your weaknesses.

No man gets over a fence by wishing himself on the other side. He
must climb.

No man gets out of the rut of dull, tiresome, monotonous life by
merely wishing himself out of the rut. He must climb.

If you are standing still, or going backward, there is something
wrong. You are the man to find out what is wrong.

Don't think that you are neglected, or not understood, or not
appreciated.

Such thoughts are the thoughts of failure.

Think hard about the fact that men who have got what you envy got
it by working for it.

Don't pity yourself, criticise yourself.

You know that the only thing in the world that you have got to
count upon is yourself.



LESSON XVIII. MENTAL CONTROL THROUGH CREATION

I attended a banquet of inventors recently. Each inventor gave a
short talk on something he thought would be accomplished in the
future. Many very much needed things were spoken of. One inventor
spoke of the possibilities of wireless telephone. Distance, he
said, would shortly be annihilated. He thought we would soon be
able to talk to the man in the submarine forty fathoms below the
surface and a thousand miles away. When he got through he asked
if there were any that doubted what he said. No one spoke up.
This was not a case of tactful politeness, as inventors like to
argue, but a case where no one present really doubted that the
inventor's vision would, in the future, materialize.

These shrewd men, some real geniuses, all thought we would in
time be able to talk to those a thousand miles away without
media. Now, if we can make an instrument so wonderful that we can
send wireless messages a thousand miles, is there any reason why
we should not through mental control transmit messages from one
person to another? The wireless message should not be as easy to
send as the projected thought.

The day will come when all business will employ highly developed
persons to send out influences. These influences will be so
dominating that employees will be partly controlled by them and so
you will profit more and more by your mental powers and depend on
them to draw to you all forces of a helpful nature. You will be
constantly sending out suggestions to your employees and friends.
They will receive these unconsciously, but in case yours is the
stronger personality they will carry them out the same as if you
had spoken them.

This is being done even today. A finely organized company secures
the combined effort of all its men. They may be each doing a
different kind of work, but all work to bring about the very best
results. The whole atmosphere is impregnated with a high standard
of workmanship. Everyone feels he must do his best. He could not
be in such surroundings and be satisfied to do anything but his
best work.

A business will succeed only to the extent that the efforts of
all are co-ordinated towards one result. At least one person is
needed to direct all toward the desired end. The person at the
head does not have to exactly outline to the others what steps to
take, but he must possess the mental power of control over
others.

An up-to-date business letter is not written in a casual,
commonplace way today. The writer tries to convey something he
thinks the receiver will be interested to know. In this way he
awakens a responsive spirit. Sometimes just the addition of a
word or two will change a letter of the matter-of-fact style to
one that compels a response. It is not always what is actually in
a letter, but the spirit which it breathes that brings results.
That intangible something that defies analysis is the projected
thought of the master that brings back the harvest that it
claims.

But we should not always claim success for ourselves only. If you
are anxious that some friend or relative should succeed, think of
this person as becoming successful. Picture him in the position
you would like to see him in. If he has a weakness, desire and
command that it be strengthened; think of his shortcomings which
belong to his negative nature as being replaced by positive
qualities. Take a certain part of the day to send him thoughts of
an up-building nature. You can in this way arouse his mental
powers into activity, and once aroused, they will assert
themselves and claim their own.

We can accomplish a great deal more than many of us are ready to
believe by sending to another our direct, positive and
controlling suggestions of leadership, but whether a man is a
success or not is greatly determined by the way he acts on the
suggestions he receives.

We either advance or decline. We never stand still. Every time we
accomplish something it gives us ability to do greater things.
The bigger the attempt undertaken, the greater the things
accomplished in the future. As a business grows, the head of the
business also has to grow. He must advance and be ever the
guiding influence. By his power to control, he inspires
confidence in those associated with him. Often employees are
superior to their employers in some qualities, and, if they had
studied, instead of neglected their development, they could have
been employers of more commanding influence than those whom they
serve.

Through your mental power you can generate in another enthusiasm
and the spirit of success, which somehow furnishes an impetus to
do something worth while.

In concentrated mental control, there is a latent power more
potent than physical force. The person becomes aware that the
attitude of the mind has a power of controlling, directing and
governing other forces. He has been placed in an attitude capable
of acquiring that which he desires.

All of us no matter how strong we are, are affected by the mental
forces of our environment. There is no one that can remain
neutral to influences. The mind cannot be freed from the forces
of a place. If the environment of your place of business is not
helpful, it will be harmful. That is why a change of position
will often do a person a great deal of good.

No person was ever intended to live alone. If you are shut up
with only your own thoughts you suffer from mental starvation.
The mind becomes narrow; the mental powers weaken. Living alone
often causes some of the milder forms of insanity. If children do
not play with those their own age, but associate with only older
people, they will take on the actions of the older people. The
same is true of older persons if they associate with people
younger than they are. They take on the spirit of youth. If you
wish to retain your youth you need the influences of youth. Like
attracts like all over the world.

The thought element plays a great part in our lives. Every
business must not only command physical effort but it must also
command thought effort. There must be co-ordination of thought.
All employers should aim to secure employees that think along
similar lines. They will work in fuller sympathy with each other.
They will better understand each other. This enables them to help
each other, which would be utterly impossible if they were not in
sympathy with each other. It is this that goes to make up a
perfect organization, which directs and influences them toward
the one end. Instead of each person being a separate unit, each
one is like a spoke in a big wheel. Each member carries his own
load, and he would not think of shirking. Anyone working in such
an atmosphere could not help turning out his best work.

All great leaders must be able to inspire this co-operative
spirit. They first secure assistance through their mental
control. They then make their assistants realize the value of
mental control. Soon there is a close bond between them; they are
working toward a single purpose. They profit by their combined
effort. The result is that they accomplish much.

If your business is conducted in the right spirit, you can
instill your thoughts and your ideas into your employees. Your
methods and ideas become theirs. They don't know it, but your
mental forces are shaping their work. They are just as certain to
produce results as any physical force in nature.

The up-to-date business man of the future is going to take pains
to get his employees to think and reason better. He will not want
them to become depressed or discouraged. There is time that
instead of being wasted he will endeavor to have them use in
concentrated effort that will be profitable to both employer and
employed. There must be more of the spirit of justice enter into
the business of the future.

There is a firm I know that will not hire an employee until he has
filled out an application blank. No doubt those that fill it out
think it is foolishness, but it is not. A capable manager can
look over this application blank and pretty nearly tell if this
person will fit into his management. The main thing he wants to
know is the applicant's capacity for efficient co-operative
effort. He wants persons that have faith in themselves. He wants
them to realize that when they talk of misfortunes and become
blue they are likely to communicate the same depressing influence
to others. The up-to-date manager wants to guard against hiring
employees who will obstruct his success.

You must realize that every moment spent in thinking of your
difficulties of the past, every moment spent in bad company is
attracting to you all that is bad; is attracting influences that
must be shaken off before you can advance.

Many firms prefer to hire employees that never worked before so
that they have nothing to unlearn. They are then not trained, but
have no bad business habits to overcome. They are more easily
guided and grasp the new methods more effectively because they
are not contrary to what they have already learned. They are at
once started on the right road, and as they co-operate readily
they receive the mental support of the management in learning the
methods that have been perfected. This inspires confidence in
themselves and they soon become efficient and, finally, skilled
workers.

Most big business firms today employ efficiency experts. Each day
or week they are in a different department. They earn their money
because they familiarize persons with very little business
experience with plans that has taken the "expert" years of
training and much money to perfect.

The attitude we take has a great deal more to do with our success
than most of us realize. We must be able to generate those forces
that are helpful. There is a wonderful power in the thought
rightly controlled and projected and we must through
concentration develop this power to the fullest possible extent.

We are surrounded by many forces of which we know but little at
present. Our knowledge of these is to be wonderfully increased.
Each year we learn more about these psychic forces which are full
of possibilities of which we are not even dimly conscious. We
must believe in mental control, learn more about it, and use it,
if we want to command these higher powers and forces which will
unquestionably direct the lives of countless future generations.



LESSON XIX. A CONCENTRATED WILL DEVELOPMENT

New Method. You will find in this chapter a most effective and
most practical method of developing the will. You can develop a
strong one if you want to. You can make your Will a dynamo to
draw to you untold power. Exercises are given which will, if
practiced, strengthen your will, just as you would strengthen
your muscles by athletic exercises.

In starting to do anything, we must first commence with
elementary principles. Simple exercises will be given. It is
impossible to estimate the ultimate good to be derived from the
mental cultivation that comes through these attempts at
concentration. Even the simple exercises are not to be thought
useless. "In no respect," writes Doctor Oppenheim, "can a man
show a finer quality of will-power than in his own private,
intimate life." We are all subjected to certain temptations. The
Will decides whether we will be just, or unjust; pure of thought;
charitable in opinion; forbearing in overlooking other's
shortcomings; whether we live up to our highest standard. Since
these are all controlled by the Will, we should find time for
plenty of exercises for training of the will in our daily life.

You, of course, realize that your will should be trained. You
must also realize that to do this requires effort that you alone
can command. No one can call it forth for you.

To be successful in these exercises you must practice them in a
spirit of seriousness and earnestness. I can show you how to
train your will, but your success depends upon your mastery and
application of these methods.

New Methods of Will-Training. Select a quiet room where you will
not be interrupted; have a watch to determine the time, and a
note-book in which to enter observations. Start each exercise
with date and time of day.


Exercise 1

Time decided on. Select some time of the day when most
convenient. Sit in a chair and look at the door-knob for ten
minutes. Then write down what you experienced. At first it will
seem strange and unnatural. You will find it hard to hold one
position for ten minutes. But keep as still as you can. The time
will seem long for it will probably be the first time you ever
sat and did nothing for ten minutes. You will find your thoughts
wandering from the door-knob, and you will wonder what there can
be in this exercise. Repeat this exercise for six days.

 10 P. M. 2nd Day.

Notes. You should be able to sit quieter, and the time should
pass more quickly. You will probably feel a little stronger
because of gaining a better control of your will. It will brace
you up, as you have kept your resolution. 10 P. M. 3rd Day.

Notes. It may be a little harder for you to concentrate on the
door-knob as perhaps you had a very busy day and your mind kept
trying to revert to what you had been doing during the day. Keep
on trying and you will finally succeed in banishing all foreign
thoughts. Then you should feel a desire to gain still more
control. There is a feeling of power that comes over you when you
are able to carry out your will. This exercise will make you feel
bigger and it awakens a sense of nobility and manliness. You will
say, "I find that I can actually do what I want to and can drive
foreign thoughts out. The exercise, I can now see, is valuable."

10 P. M. 4th Day.

Notes. "I found that I could look at the door-knob and
concentrate my attention on it at once. Have overcome the
tendency to move my legs. No other thoughts try to enter as I
have established the fact that I can do what I want to do and do
not have to be directed. I feel that I am gaining in mental
strength, I can now see the wonderful value of being the master
of my own will-force. I know now if I make a resolution I will
keep it. I have more self-confidence and can feel my self-control
increasing.

10 P. M. 5th Day.

Notes. "Each day I seem to increase the intensity of my
concentration. I feel that I can center my attention on anything
I wish.

10 P. M. 6th Day.

Notes. "I can instantly center my whole attention on the
door-knob. Feel that I have thoroughly mastered this exercise and
that I am ready for another."

You have practiced this exercise enough, but before you start
another I want you to write a summary of just how successful you
were in controlling the flitting impulses of the mind and will.
You will find this an excellent practice. There is nothing more
beneficial to the mind than to pay close attention to its own
wonderful, subtle activities.


Exercise 2

Secure a package of playing cards. Select some time to do the
exercise. Each day at the appointed time, take the pack in one
hand and then start laying them down on top of each other just as
slowly as you can, with an even motion. Try to get them as even
as possible. Each card laid down should completely cover the
under one. Do this exercise for six days.

1st Day.

Notes. Task will seem tedious and tiresome. Requires the closest
concentration to make each card completely cover the preceding
one. You will probably want to lay them down faster. It requires
patience to lay them down so slowly, but benefit is lost if not
so placed. You will find that at first your motions will be jerky
and impetuous. It will require a little practice before you gain
an easy control over your hands and arms. You probably have never
tried to do anything in such a calm way. It will require the
closest attention of your will. But you will find that you are
acquiring a calmness you never had before. You are gradually
acquiring new powers. You recognize how impulsive and impetuous
you have been, and how, by using your will, you can control your
temperament.

2nd Day.

Notes. You start laying the cards down slowly. You will find that
by practice you can lay them down much faster. But you want to
lay them down slowly and therefore you have to watch yourself.
The slow, steady movement is wearisome. You have to conquer the
desire of wanting to hurry up. Soon you will find that you can go
slowly or fast at will.

3rd Day.

Notes. You still find it hard to go slowly. Your will urges you
to go faster. This is especially true if you are impulsive, as
the impulsive character finds it very difficult to do anything
slowly and deliberately. It goes against the "grain." This
exercise still is tiresome. But when you do it, it braces you up
mentally. You are accomplishing something you do not like to do.
It teaches you how to concentrate on disagreeable tasks. Writing
these notes down you will find very helpful.

4th Day.

Notes. I find that I am beginning to place the cards in a
mathematical way. I find one card is not completely covering
another. I am getting a little careless and must be more careful.
I command my will to concentrate more. It does not seem so hard
to bring it under control.

5th Day.

Notes. I find that I am overcoming my jerky movements, that I can
lay the cards down slowly and steadily. I feel that I am rapidly
gaining more poise. I am getting better control over my will each
day, and my will completely controls my movements. I begin to
look on my will as a great governing power. I would not think of
parting with the knowledge of will I have gained. I find it is a
good exercise and know it will help me to accomplish my tasks.

6th Day.

Notes. I begin to feel the wonderful possibilities of the will.
It gives me strength to think of the power of will. I am able to
do so much more and better work now, that I realize that I can
control my will action. Whatever my task, my will is concentrated
on it. I am to keep my will centered there until the task is
finished. The more closely and definitely I determine what I
shall do, the more easily the will carries it out. Determination
imparts compelling force to the will. It exerts itself more. The
will and the end act and react on each other.

7th Day.

Notes. Now try to do everything you do today faster. Don't hurry
or become nervous. Just try to do everything faster, but in a
steady manner.

You will find that the exercises you have practiced in
retardation have steadied your nerves, and thereby made it
possible to increase your speed. The will is under your command.
Make it carry out resolutions rapidly. This is how you build up
your self-control and your self-command. It is then that the
human machine acts as its author dictates.

You certainly should now be able to judge of the great benefit
that comes from writing out your introspections each day. Of
course you will not have the exact experiences given in these
examples, but some of these will fit your case. Be careful to
study your experiences carefully and make as true a report as you
can. Describe your feelings just as they seem to you. Allow your
fancies to color your report and it will be worthless. You have
pictured conditions as you see them. In a few months, if you
again try the same exercises, you will find your report very much
better. By these introspections, we learn to know ourselves
better and with this knowledge can wonderfully increase our
efficiency. As you become used to writing out your report, it
will be more accurate. You thus learn how to govern your
impulses, activities and weaknesses.

Each person should try to plan exercises that will best fit his
needs. If not convenient for you to practice exercises every day,
take them twice or three times a week. But carry out any plan you
decide to try. If you cannot devote ten minutes a day to the
experiments start with five minutes and gradually increase the
time. The exercises given are only intended for examples.

Will Training Without Exercise. There are many people that do not
want to take the time to practice exercises, so the following
instructions for training the will are given to them.

By willing and realizing, the will grows. Therefore the more you
will, the more it grows, and builds up power. No matter whether
your task is big or small, make it a rule to accomplish it in
order to fortify your will. Form the habit of focusing your will
in all its strength upon the subject to be achieved. You form in
this way the habit of getting a thing done, of carrying out some
plan. You acquire the feeling of being able to accomplish that
which lies before you, no matter what it is. This gives you
confidence and a sense of power that you get in no other way. You
know when you make a resolution that you will keep it. You do not
tackle new tasks in a half-hearted way, but with a bold, brave
spirit. We know that the will is able to carry us over big
obstacles. Knowing this despair never claims us for a victim. We
have wills and are going to use them with more and more
intensity, thus giving us the power to make our resolutions
stronger, our actions freer and our lives finer and better.

The education of the will should not be left to chance. It is
only definite tasks that will render it energetic, ready,
persevering and consistent. The only way it can be done is by
self-study and self-discipline. The cost is effort, time and
patience, but the returns are valuable. There are no magical
processes leading to will development, but the development of
your will works wonders for you because it gives you
self-mastery, personal power and energy of character.

Concentration of the Will to Win. The adaptability of persons to
their business environment is more a matter of determination than
anything else. In this age we hear a good deal of talk about a
man's aptitudes. Some of his aptitudes, some of his powers, may
be developed to a wonderful extent, but he is really an unknown
quality until all his latent powers are developed to their
highest possible extent. He may be a failure in one line and a
big success in another. There are many successful men, that did
not succeed well at what they first undertook, but they profited
by their efforts in different directions, and this fitted them
for higher things, whereas had they refused to adjust themselves
to their environment, the tide of progress would have swept them
into oblivion.

My one aim in all my works is to try and arouse in the individual
the effort and determination to develop his full capacities, his
highest possibilities. One thing I want you to realize at the
start, that it is not so much ability, as it is the will to do
that counts. Ability is very plentiful, but organizing initiative
and creative power are not plentiful. It is easy to get employees,
but to get someone to train them is harder. Their abilities must
be directed to the work they can do. They must be shown how,
while at this work, to conserve their energy and they must be
taught to work in harmony with others, for most business concerns
are dominated by a single personality.

Concentrating on Driving Force Within. We are all conscious, at
times, that we have somewhere within us an active driving force
that is ever trying to push us onward to better deeds. It is that
"force" that makes us feel determined at times to do something
worth while. It is not thought, emotion or feeling. This driving
force is something distinct from thought or emotion. It is a
quality of the soul and therefore it has a consciousness all its
own. It is the "I will do" of the will. It is the force that
makes the will concentrate. Many have felt this force working
within them, driving them on to accomplish their tasks. All great
men and women become conscious that this supreme and powerful
force is their ally in carrying out great resolutions.

This driving force is within all, but until you reach a certain
stage you do not become aware of it. It is most useful to the
worthy. It springs up naturally without any thought of training.
It comes unprovoked and leaves unnoticed. Just what this force is
we do not know, but we do know that it is what intensifies the
will in demanding just and harmonious action.


The ordinary human being, merely as merchandise, if he could be
sold as a slave, would be worth ten thousand dollars. If somebody
gave you a five thousand dollar automobile you would take very
good care of it. You wouldn't put sand in the carburetor, or mix
water with the gasoline, or drive it furiously over rough roads,
or leave it out to freeze at night.

Are you quite sure that you take care of your own body, your own
health, your only real property, as well as you would take care
of a five thousand dollar automobile if it were given to you?

The man who mixes whiskey with his blood is more foolish than a
man would be if he mixed water with gasoline in his car.

You can get another car; you cannot get another body.

The man who misses sleep lives irregularly--bolts his food so
that his blood supply is imperfect. That is a foolish man
treating himself as he would not treat any other valuable piece
of property.

Do you try to talk with men and women who know more than you do,
and do you LISTEN rather than try to tell them what you know?

There are a hundred thousand men of fifty, and men of sixty,
running along in the old rut, any one of whom could get out of it
and be counted among the successful men if only the spark could
be found to explode the energy within them now going to waste.

Each man must study and solve his own problem.



LESSON XX. CONCENTRATION REVIEWED

In bringing this book to a close, I again want to impress you
with the inestimable value of concentration, because those that
lack this great power or, rather that fail to develop it, will
generally suffer from poverty and unhappiness and their life's
work will most often be a failure, while those that develop and
use it will make the most of life's opportunities,

I have tried to make these lessons practical and I am sure that
many will find them so. Of course the mere reading of them will
not do you a great deal of good, but, if the exercises are
practiced and worked out and applied to your own individual case,
you should be able to acquire the habit of concentration in such
measure as to greatly improve your work and increase your
happiness.

But remember the best instruction can only help you to the extent
to which you put it into practice. I have found it an excellent
idea to read a book through first, and then re-read it, and when
you come to an idea that appeals to you, stop and think about it,
then if applicable to you, repeat it over and over, that you will
be impressed by it. In this way you can form the habit of picking
out all the good things you read and these will have a wonderful
influence on your character.

In this closing chapter, I want to impress you to concentrate on
what you do, instead of performing most of your work
unconsciously or automatically, until you have formed habits that
give you the mastery of your work and your life powers and
forces.

Very often the hardest part of work is thinking about it. When
you get right into it, it does not seem so disagreeable. This is
the experience of many when they first commence to learn how to
concentrate. So never think it a difficult task, but undertake it
with the "I Will Spirit" and you will find that its acquirement
will be as easy as its application will be useful.

Read the life of any great man, and you will generally find that
the dominant quality that made him successful was the ability to
concentrate. Study those that have been failures and you will
often find that lack of concentration was the cause.

"One thing at a time, and that done will

Is a good rule as I can tell."

All men are not born with equal powers, but it is the way they
are used that counts. "Opportunity knocks at every man's door."
Those that are successful hear the knock and grasp the chance.
The failures believe that luck and circumstances are against
them. They always blame someone else instead of themselves for
their lack of success. We get what is coming to us, nothing more
or less. Anything within the universe is within your grasp. Just
use your latent powers and it is yours. You are aided by both
visible and invisible forces when you concentrate on either "to
do" or "to be."

Everyone is capable of some concentration, for without it you
would be unable to say or do anything. People differ in the power
to concentrate because some are unable to Will to hold the
thought in mind for the required time. The amount of
determination used determines who has the strongest will. No
one's is stronger than yours. Think of this whenever you go
against a strong opponent.

Never say "I can't concentrate today." You can do it just the
minute you say "I will." You can keep your thoughts from
straying, just the same as you can control your arms. When once
you realize this fact, you can train the will to concentrate on
anything you wish. If it wanders, it is your fault. You are not
utilizing your will. But, don't blame it on your will and say it
is weak. The will is just the same whether you act as if it were
weak or as if it were strong. When you act as if your will is
strong you say, "I can." When you act as if it were weak you say,
"I can't." It requires the same amount of effort, in each case.

Some men get in the habit of thinking "I can't" and they fail.
Others think "I can" and succeed. So remember, it is for you to
decide whether you will join the army of "I can't" or "I can."

The big mistake with so many is that they don't realize that when
they say "I can't," they really say, "I won't try." You can not
tell what you can do until you try. "Can't" means you will not
try. Never say you cannot concentrate, for, when you do, you are
really saying that you refuse to try.

Whenever you feel like saying, "I can't," say instead, "I possess
all will and I can use as much as I wish." You only use as much
as you have trained yourself to use.

An Experiment to Try. Before going to bed tonight, repeat, "I am
going to choose my own thoughts, and to hold them as long as I
choose. I am going to shut out all thoughts that weaken or
interfere; that make me timid. My Will is as strong as anyone's
else. While going to work the next morning, repeat this over.
Keep this up for a month and you will find you will have a better
opinion of yourself. These are the factors that make you a
success. Hold fast to them always.

Concentration is nothing but willing to do a certain thing. All
foreign thoughts can be kept out by willing that they stay out.
You cannot realize your possibilities until you commence to
direct your mind. You then do consciously what you have before
done unconsciously. In this way you note mistakes, overcome bad
habits and perfect your conduct.

You have at times been in a position that required courage and
you were surprised at the amount you showed. Now, when once you
arouse yourself, you have this courage all the time and it is not
necessary to have a special occasion reveal it to you. My object
in so strongly impressing this on your mind is to make you aware
that the same courage, the same determination that you show at
certain exceptionable times you have at your command at all
times. It is a part of your vast resources. Use it often and
well, in working out the highest destiny of which you are
capable.

Final Concentration Instruction. You now realize that, in order
to make your life worthy, useful and happy, you must concentrate.
A number of exercises and all the needed instruction has been
given. It now remains for you to form the highest ideal that you
can in the present and live up to that ideal, and try to raise
it. Don't waste your time in foolish reading. Select something
that is inspiring, that you may become enrapport with those that
think thoughts that are worth while. Their enthusiasm will
inspire and enlighten you. Read slowly and concentrate on what
you are reading. Let your spirit and the spirit of the author
commune, and you will then sense what is between the lines--those
great things which words cannot express.

Pay constant attention to one and one thing only for a given time
and you will soon be able to concentrate. Hang on to that thought
ceaselessly until you have attained your object. When you work,
let your mind dwell steadily on your task. Think before you speak
and direct your conversation to the subject under discussion. Do
not ramble. Talk slowly, steadily and connectedly. Never form the
hurry habit, but be deliberate in all you do. Assume static
attitudes without moving a finger or an eyelid, or any part of
your body. Read books that treat of but one continuous subject.
Read long articles and recall the thread of the argument.
Associate yourself with people who are steady, patient and
tireless in their thought, action and work. See how long you can
sit still and think on one subject without interruption.

Concentrating on the Higher Self. Father Time keeps going on and
on. Every day he rolls around means one less day for you on this
planet. Most of us only try to master the external conditions of
this world. We think our success and happiness depends on us
doing so. These are of course important and I don't want you to
think they are not, but I want you to realize that when death
comes, only those inherent and acquired qualities and conditions
within the mentality--your character, conduct and soul
growth--will go with you. If these are what they should be, you
need not be afraid of not being successful and happy, for with
these qualities you can mold external materials and conditions.

Study yourself. Find Your Strong Points And Make Them Stronger As
Well As Your Weak Ones And Strengthen Them. Study yourself
carefully and you will see yourself as you really are.

The secret of accomplishment is concentration, or the art of
turning all your power upon just one point at a time.

If you have studied yourself carefully you should have a good
line on yourself, and should be able to make the proper interior
re-adjustments. Remember first, last, and always, Right thinking
and right Living necessarily results in happiness, and it is
therefore within your power to obtain happiness. Anyone that is
not happy does not claim their birthright.

Keep in mind that some day you are going to leave this world and
think of what you will take with you. This will assist you to
concentrate on the higher forces. Now start from this minute, to
act according to the advice of the higher self in everything you
do. If you do, its ever harmonious forces will necessarily insure
to you a successful fulfilment of all your life purposes.
Whenever you feel tempted to disobey your higher promptings, hold
the thought

"My-higher-self-insures-to-me-the-happiness-of-doing-that-which
-best-answers-my-true-relations-to-all-others."

You possess latent talents, that when developed and utilized are
of assistance to you and others. But if you do not properly use
them, you shirk your duty, and you will be the loser and suffer
from the consequences. Others will also be worse off if you do
not fulfil your obligations.

When you have aroused into activity your thought powers you will
realize the wonderful value of these principles in helping you to
carry out your plans. The right in the end must prevail. You can
assist in the working out of the great plan of the universe and
thereby gain the reward, or you can work against the great plan
and suffer the consequences. The all consuming fires are
gradually purifying all discordant elements. If you choose to
work contrary to the law you will burn in its crucible, so I want
you to learn to concentrate intelligently on becoming in harmony
with your higher self. Hold the thought:
"I-will-live-for-my-best. I-seek-wisdom, self-knowledge,
happiness-and-power-to-help-others. I-act-from-the-higher-self,
therefore-only-the-best-can-come-to-me. The more we become
conscious of the presence of the higher self the more we should
try to become a true representative of the human soul in all its
wholeness and holiness, instead of wasting our time dwelling on
some trifling external quality or defect. We should try to secure
a true conception of what we really are so as not to over value
the external furnishings. You will then not surrender your
dignity or self respect, when others ignorantly make a display of
material things to show off. Only the person that realizes that
he is a permanent Being knows what the true self is.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext of The Power of Concentration, by Dumont

##############################################################################
## INQUIRIES INTO HUMAN FACULTY — Francis Galton (1883) — the founding science of mental imagery: vividness, individual differences, the breakfast-table study
##############################################################################

E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Robert Prince, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 11562-h.htm or 11562-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/5/6/11562/11562-h/11562-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/5/6/11562/11562-h.zip)





INQUIRIES INTO HUMAN FACULTY AND ITS DEVELOPMENT

by

FRANCIS GALTON
F-R-S


First issue of this Edition 1907






PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

After some years had passed subsequent to the publication of this
book in 1883, its publishers, Messrs. Macmillan, informed me that
the demand for it just, but only just warranted a revised issue. I
shrank from the great trouble of bringing it up to date because it,
or rather many of my memoirs out of which it was built up, had
become starting-points for elaborate investigations both in England
and in America, to which it would be difficult and very laborious to
do justice in a brief compass. So the question of a Second Edition
was then entirely dropped. Since that time the book has by no means
ceased to live, for it continues to be quoted from and sought for,
but is obtainable only with difficulty, and at much more than its
original cost, at sales of second-hand books. Moreover, it became
the starting point of that recent movement in favour of National
Eugenics (see note p. 24 in first edition) which is recognised by
the University of London, and has its home in University College.

Having received a proposal to republish the book in its present
convenient and inexpensive form, I gladly accepted it, having first
sought and received an obliging assurance from Messrs. Macmillan
that they would waive all their claims to the contrary in my favour.

The following small changes are made in this edition. The
illustrations are for the most part reduced in size to suit the
smaller form of the volume, the lettering of the composites is
rearranged, and the coloured illustration is reproduced as closely
as circumstances permit. Two chapters are omitted, on "Theocratic
Intervention" and on the "Objective Efficacy of Prayer." The earlier
part of the latter was too much abbreviated from the original memoir
in the _Fortnightly Review_, 1872, and gives, as I now perceive, a
somewhat inexact impression of its object, which was to investigate
certain views then thought orthodox, but which are growing obsolete.
I could not reinsert these omissions now with advantage, unless
considerable additions were made to the references, thus giving more
appearance of personal controversy to the memoirs than is desirable.
After all, the omission of these two chapters, in which I find
nothing to recant, improves, as I am told, the general balance of the
book.                                   FRANCIS GALTON.



LIST OF WORKS.

The Teletype: a printing Electric Telegraph, 1850;
The Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa, 1853,
   in "Minerva Library of Famous Books," 1889;
Notes on Modern Geography (Cambridge Essays, 1855, etc.);
Arts of Campaigning: an Inaugural Lecture delivered at Aldershot, 1855;
The Art of Travel, or Shifts and Contrivances available in Wild Countries,
   1855, 1856, 1860 (1859);
   fourth edition, recast and enlarged, 1867, 1872;
Vacation Tourists and Notes on Travel, 1861, 1862, 1864;
Meteorographica, or Methods of Mapping the Weather, 1863;
Hereditary Genius: an Enquiry into its Laws and Consequences, 1869;
English Men of Science: their Nature and Nurture, 1874;
Address to the Anthropological Departments of the British Association
   (Plymouth, 1877);
Generic Images: with Autotype Illustrations
   (from the Proceedings of the Royal Institution), 1879;
Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development, 1883;
Record of Family Faculties, 1884; Natural Inheritance, 1889;
Finger-Prints, 1892;
Decipherments of Blurred Finger-Prints
   (supplementary chapters to former work), 1893;
Finger-Print Directories, 1895;
Introduction to Life of W. Cotton Oswell, 1900;
Index to Achievements of Near Kinsfolk
   of some of the Fellows of the Royal Society, 1904;
Eugenics: its Definition, Scope, and Aims
   (Sociological Society Papers, vols. I. and II.), 1905;
Noteworthy Families (Modern Science);
And many papers in the Proceedings of the Royal Society,
   Journals of the Geographical Society and the Anthropological Institute,
   the Reports of the British Association, the Philosophical Magazine,
   and Nature.

Galton also edited:
Hints to Travellers, 1878;
Life-History Album (British Medical Association), 1884,
    second edition, 1902;
Biometrika (edited in consultation with F.G. and W.F.R. Weldon), 1901,
   etc.;
   and under his direction was designed a
   Descriptive List of Anthropometric Apparatus, etc., 1887.



LIST OF MEMOIRS.

The following Memoirs by the author have been freely made use of in
the following pages:--

1863: The First Steps towards the Domestication of Animals
   (_Journal of Ethnological Society_);
1871: Gregariousness in Cattle and in Men
   (_Macmillan's Magazine_);
1872: Statistical Inquiries into the Efficacy of Prayer
    (_Fortnightly Review_);
1873: Relative Supplies from Town and Country Families
   to the Population of Future Generations
   (_Journal of Statistical Society_);
Hereditary Improvement (_Fraser's Magazine_);
Africa for the Chinese (_Times_, June 6);
1875: Statistics by Intercomparison (_Philosophical Magazine_);
Twins, as a Criterion of the Relative Power of Nature and Nurture
   (_Fraser's Magazine_, and
   _Journal of Anthropological Institute_);
1876: Whistles for Determining the Upper Limits of Audible Sound
   (_S. Kensington Conferences_, in connection with the
   Loan Exhibition of Scientific Instruments, p. 61);
1877: Presidential Address to the Anthropological Department
   of the British Association at Plymouth
   (_Report of British Association_);
1878: Composite Portraits (_Nature_, May 23, and
   _Journal of Anthropological Institute_);
1879: Psychometric Experiments (_Nineteenth Century_,
   and _Brain_, part vi.);
Generic Images (_Nineteenth Century; Proceedings of
   Royal Institution_, with plates);
Geometric Mean in Vital and Social Statistics (_Proceedings
   of Royal Society_);
1880: Visualised Numerals (_Nature_, Jan. 15 and March 25, and
   _Journal of Anthropological Institute_);
Mental Imagery (_Fortnightly Review; Mind_);
1881: Visions of Sane Persons (_Fortnightly Review_, and
   _Proceedings of Royal Institution_);
Composite Portraiture (_Journal of Photographical Society
   of Great Britain_, June 24);
1882: Physiognomy of Phthisis (_Guy's Hospital Reports_, vol. xxv.);
Photographic Chronicles from Childhood to Age (_Fortnightly Review_);
The Anthropometric Laboratory (_Fortnightly Review_);
1883: Some Apparatus for Testing the Delicacy of the Muscular
   and other Senses (_Journal of Anthropological Institute_,
   1883, etc.).


_Memoirs in Eugenics_.

1901: Huxley Lecture, Anthropological Institute (_Nature,_ Nov. 1901);
Smithsonian Report for 1901 (_Washington_, p. 523);
1904: Eugenics, its Definition, Scope and Aims
   (Sociological Paper, vol. i., _Sociological Institute_);
1905: Restrictions in Marriage, Studies in National Eugenics,
   Eugenics as a Factor in Religion (Sociological Papers, vol. ii.);
1907: Herbert Spencer Lecture, University of Oxford,
   on Probability the Foundation of Eugenics.

The following books by the author have been referred or alluded to
in the following pages:--

1853: Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South-Western Africa
   (_Murray)_;
1854: Art of Travel (several subsequent editions,
   the last in 1872, _Murray_);
1869: Hereditary Genius, its Laws and Consequences
   (_Macmillan_);
1874: English Men of Science, their Nature and their Nurture
   (_Macmillan_).




CONTENTS


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

INTRODUCTION

  Origin and object of book.

VARIETY OF HUMAN NATURE

  Many varieties may each be good of its kind; advantage
  of variety; some peculiarities are, however, harmful.

FEATURES

  Large number of elements in the human expression; of
  touches in a portrait; difficulty of measuring the separate
  features; or of selecting typical individuals; the typical
  English face; its change at different historical periods;
  colour of hair of modern English; caricatures.

COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE

  (See Appendix for three Memoirs describing successive
  stages of the method).--Object and principle of the process;
  description of the plate--composites of medals; of family
  portraits; of the two sexes and of various ages; of Royal
  Engineers; the latter gives a clue to one direction in which
  the English race might be improved; of criminals; of the
  consumptive; ethnological application of the process.

BODILY QUALITIES

  Anthropometric Committee; statistical anomalies in stature
  as dependent on age; town and rural population; athletic
  feats now and formerly; increase of stature of middle classes;
  large number of weakly persons; some appearances of weakness
  may be fallacious; a barrel and a wheel; definition
  of word "eugenic."

ENERGY

  It is the attribute of high races; useful stimuli to activity;
  fleas, etc.; the preservation of the weakly as exercises for
  pity; that of foxes for sport.

SENSITIVITY

  Sensation and pain; range and grades of sensation;
  idiots; men and women; the blind; reading by touch;
  sailors; paucity of words to express gradation.

SEQUENCE OF TEST WEIGHTS

  (See also Appendix, p. 248).--Geometric series of
  weights; method of using them; the same principle is
  applicable to other senses; the tests only measure the state
  of faculties at time of trial; cautions in constructing the
  test weights; multiplicity of the usual perceptions.

WHISTLES FOR AUDIBILITY OF SHRILL NOTES

  (See also Appendix, p. 252).--Construction of them; loss
  of power of hearing high notes as age advances; trials upon
  animals; sensitivity of cats to high notes; of small dogs and
  ponies.

ANTHROPOMETRIC REGISTERS

  Want of anthropometric laboratories; of family records;
  opportunities in schools; Admiralty records of life of each
  seaman; family registers (see also 220); autotypes; medical
  value of ancestral life-histories (see also 220); of their
  importance to human eugenics.

UNCONSCIOUSNESS OF PECULIARITIES

  Colour blindness usually unsuspected; unconsciousness of
  high intellectual gifts; of peculiarities of mental imagery;
  heredity of colour blindness in Quakers; Young and Dalton.

STATISTICAL METHODS

  Objects of statistical science; constancy and continuity
  of statistical results; groups and sub-groups; augival or
  ogival curves; wide application of the ogival; method;
  example; first method of comparing two ogival groups;
  centesimal grades; example; second method of comparing
  ogival groups; statistical records easily made with a
  pricker.

CHARACTER

  Caprice and coyness of females; its cause; observations
  of character at schools; varieties of likings and antipathies;
  horror of snakes is by no means universal; the horror of
  blood among cattle is variable.

CRIMINALS AND THE INSANE

  Peculiarities of criminal character; some of them are
  normal and not morbid; their inheritance as in the Jukes
  family; epileptics and their nervous instability; insanity;
  religious rapture; strange views of the insane on individuality;
  their moody segregation; the religious discipline of
  celibacy, fasting and solitude (see also 125); large field of
  study among the insane and idiotic.

GREGARIOUS AND SLAVISH INSTINCTS

  Most men shrink from responsibility; study of gregarious
  animals: especially of the cattle of the Damaras; fore-oxen
  to waggon teams; conditions of safety of herds; cow and
  young calf when approached by lions; the most effective
  size of herd; corresponding production of leaders; similarly
  as regards barbarian tribes and their leaders; power of
  tyranny vested in chiefs; political and religious persecutions;
  hence human servility; but society may flourish without
  servility; its corporate actions would then have statistical
  constancy; nations who are guided by successive orators,
  etc., must be inconstant; the romantic side of servility; free
  political life.

INTELLECTUAL DIFFERENCES

  Reference to _Hereditary Genius_.

MENTAL IMAGERY

  Purport of inquiry; circular of questions (see Appendix
  for this); the first answers were from scientific men,
  and were negative; those from persons in general society
  were quite the reverse; sources of my materials; they are
  mutually corroborative. Analysis of returns from 100
  persons mostly of some eminence; extracts from replies of
  those in whom the visualising faculty is highest; those in
  whom it is mediocre; lowest; conformity between these
  and other sets of haphazard returns; octile, median, etc.,
  values; visualisation of colour; some liability to exaggeration;
  blindfold chess-players; remarkable instances of visualisation;
  the faculty is not necessarily connected with keen sight or
  tendency to dream; comprehensive imagery; the faculty in different
  sexes and ages; is strongly hereditary; seems notable among
  the French; Bushmen; Eskimo; prehistoric men; admits of being
  educated; imagery usually fails in flexibility; special and generic
  images (see also Appendix); use of the faculty.

NUMBER-FORMS

  General account of the peculiarity; mutually corroborative
  statements; personal evidence given at the Anthropological
  Institute; specimens of a few descriptions and
  illustrative woodcuts; great variety in the Forms; their
  early origin; directions in which they run; bold conceptions
  of children concerning height and depth; historical
  dates, months, etc.; alphabet; derivation of the Forms
  from the spoken names of numerals; fixity of the Form
  compared to that of the handwriting; of animals working
  in constant patterns; of track of eye when searching for
  lost objects; occasional origin from figures on clock; from
  various other sources; the non-decimal nomenclature of
  numerals; perplexity caused by it. Description of figures
  in Plate I.; Plate II.; Plate III.; Plate IV. Colours
  assigned to numerals (see 105); personal characters; sex;
  frequency with which the various numerals are used in the
  Talmud.

COLOUR ASSOCIATIONS

  (Description of Plate IV. continued) Associations with
  numerals; with words and letters; illustrations by Dr. J.
  Key; the scheme of one seer unintelligible to other seers;
  mental music, etc.

VISIONARIES

  Sane persons often see visions; the simpler kinds of
  visions; unconsciousness of seers, at first, of their
  peculiarity; subsequent dislike to speak about it; imagery
  connected with words; that of Mrs. Haweis; automatic changes
  in dark field of eye; my own experiences; those of Rev. G. Henslow;
  visions frequently unlike vivid visualisations; phantasmagoria;
  hallucinations; simile of a seal in a pond; dreams and partial
  sensitiveness of brain; hallucinations and illusions, their causes;
  "faces in the fire," etc.; sub-conscious picture-drawing; visions
  based on patched recollections; on blended recollections; hereditary
  seership; visions caused by fasting, etc.; by spiritual discipline
  (see also 47); star of Napoleon I.; hallucinations of
  great men; seers commoner at some periods than at others;
  reasons why.

NURTURE AND NATURE

  Their effects are difficult to separate; the same character
  has many phases; Renaissance; changes owing merely to
  love of change; feminine fashions; periodical sequences of
  changed character in birds; the interaction of nurture and
  nature.

ASSOCIATIONS

  Derived from experience; especially from childish recollections
  (see 141); abstract ideas; cumulative ideas, like composite
  portraits (see also Appendix, "Generic Images,"  p. 229);
  their resemblance even in details.

PSYCHOMETRIC EXPERIMENTS

  Difficulty of watching the mind in operation; how it may
  be overcome; irksomeness of the process; tentative experiments;
  method used subsequently; the number of recurrent
  associations; memory; ages at which associations are
  formed; similarity of the associations in persons of the same
  country and class of society; different descriptions of
       associations,
  classified; their relative frequency; abstract ideas are
  slowly formed; multifariousness of sub-conscious operations.

ANTECHAMBER OF CONSCIOUSNESS

  Act of thinking analysed; automatic mental work; fluency
  of words and of imagery; processes of literary composition;
  fluency of spiritual ideas; visionary races of men; morbid
  ideas of inspiration (see Enthusiasm).

EARLY SENTIMENTS

  Accidents of education, religion, country, etc.; deaf-mutes
  and religious ritual; religion in its essentials; all religious
  teachers preach faith and instil prejudices; origin of the
  faculty of conscience; evolution is always behindhand;
  good men of various faiths; the fear of death; terror is
  easily taught; gregarious animals (see also 47); suspiciousness
  in the children of criminals; Dante and contemporary
  artists on the terrors of hell; aversion is easily taught,
  Eastern ideas of clean and unclean acts; the foregoing
  influences affect entire classes.

HISTORY OF TWINS

  It supplies means of comparing the effects of nurture and
  nature; physiological signification of twinship; replies to
  a circular of inquiries; eighty cases of close resemblance
  between twins; the points in which their resemblance was
  closest; extracts from the replies; interchangeableness of
  likeness; cases of similar forms of insanity in both twins;
  their tastes and dispositions; causes of growing dissimilarity
  mainly referred to illness; partly to gradual development of
  latent elements of dissimilarity; effect of childish illnesses
  in permanently checking growth of head; parallel lives and
  deaths among twins; necessitarianism; twenty cases of great
  dissimilarity; extracts from the replies; evidence of slight
  exaggeration; education is almost powerless to diminish
  natural difference of character; simile of sticks floating
  down a brook; depth of impressions made in childhood;
  they are partly due to the ease with which parents and
  children understand one another; cuckoos forget the teachings
  of their foster-mothers.

DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS

  Alternative hypotheses of the prehistoric process of
  domestication; savages rear captive animals; instances in
  North America; South America; North Africa; Equatorial
  Africa; South Africa; Australia; New Guinea Group;
  Polynesia; ancient Syria. Sacred animals; menageries
  and shows in amphitheatres; instances in ancient Egypt;
  Assyria; Rome; Mexico; Peru; Syria and Greece.
  Domestication is only possible when the species has certain
  natural faculties, viz.--great hardiness; fondness for man;
  desire of comfort; usefulness to man; fertility; being easy
  to tend. Habitual selection of the tamest to breed from.
  Exceptions; summary.

THE OBSERVED ORDER OF EVENTS

  Steady improvement in the birthright of successive generations;
  our ignorance of the origin and purport of all existence;
  of the outcome of life on this earth; of the conditions
  of consciousness; slow progress of evolution and its
  system of ruthless routine; man is the heir of long bygone
  ages; has great power in expediting the course of evolution;
  he might render its progress less slow and painful;
  does not yet understand that it may be his part to do so.

SELECTION AND RACE

  Difference between the best specimens of a poor race and
  the mediocre ones of a high race; typical centres to which
  races tend to revert; delicacy of highly-bred animals; their
  diminished fertility; the misery of rigorous selection; it is
  preferable to replace poor races by better ones; strains of
  emigrant blood; of exiles.

INFLUENCE OF MAN UPON RACE

  Conquest, migrations, etc.; sentiment against extinguishing
  races; is partly unreasonable; the so-called "aborigines";
  on the variety and number of different races
  inhabiting the same country; as in Spain; history of the
  Moors; Gypsies; the races in Damara Land; their recent
  changes; races in Siberia; Africa; America; West Indies;
  Australia and New Zealand; wide diffusion of Arabs and
  Chinese; power of man to shape future humanity.

POPULATION

  Over-population; Malthus--the danger of applying his
  prudential check; his originality; his phrase of misery check
  is in many cases too severe; decaying races and the cause
  of decay.

EARLY AND LATE MARRIAGES

  Estimate of their relative effects on a population in a few
  generations; example.

MARKS FOR FAMILY MERIT

  On the demand for definite proposals how to improve
  race; the demand is not quite fair, and the reasons why;
  nevertheless attempt is made to suggest the outline of one;
  on the signs of superior race; importance of giving weight
  to them when making selections from candidates who are
  personally equal; on families that have thriven; that are
  healthy and long-lived; present rarity of our knowledge
  concerning family antecedents; Mr. F.M. Hollond on the
  superior morality of members of large families; Sir William
  Gull on their superior vigour; claim for importance of
  further inquiries into the family antecedents of those who
  succeed in after life; probable large effect of any system
  by which marks might be conferred on the ground of family
  merit.

ENDOWMENTS

  These have frequently been made in order to furnish
  marriage portions; they, as well as the adoption of gifted
  children of gifted families, may hereafter become common;
  college statutes enjoining celibacy on Fellows; reverse effect
  to that for which prizes at races were established; the recent
  reform of those statutes and numerous marriages in consequence;
  the English race has yet to be explored for its
  natural wealth; those who are naturally gifted would be
  disinclined to squander their patrimony; social consideration;
  honest pride in goodness of race.

CONCLUSION

  Epitome of data; the apparent place of man in nature;
  he should look upon himself as a freeman; he should assist
  in furthering evolution; his present ability to do so; the
  certainty that his ability of doing so will increase; importance
  of life-histories; brief summary.


APPENDIX

A. COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE

  I. Extract of Memoir read in 1878 before the Anthropological
       Institute;
  II. Generic Images, extract from Lecture in 1879 to Royal
       Institution;
  III. Memoir read in 1881 before the Photographic Society.

B. THE RELATIVE SUPPLIES FROM TOWN AND COUNTRY FAMILIES
   TO THE POPULATION OF FUTURE GENERATIONS

  Memoir read in 1873 before the Statistical Society.

C. AN APPARATUS FOR TESTING THE DELICACY WITH WHICH WEIGHTS
   CAN BE DISCRIMINATED BY HANDLING THEM

  Memoir read in 1882 before the Anthropological Institute.

D. WHISTLES FOR TESTING THE UPPER LIMITS OF AUDIBLE SOUND
   IN DIFFERENT INDIVIDUALS

  Read in 1876 at the South Kensington Conferences in
  connection with the Loan Exhibition of Scientific Instruments.

E. QUESTIONS ON VISUALISING AND OTHER ALLIED FACULTIES

  Circulated in 1880.





PLATES


SPECIMENS OF COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE

EXAMPLES OF NUMBER-FORMS

EXAMPLES OF NUMBER-FORMS

EXAMPLES OF NUMBER FORMS, HEREDITARY

COLOUR ASSOCIATIONS AND MENTAL IMAGERY

INQUIRIES INTO HUMAN FACULTY




INTRODUCTION.

Since the publication of my work on _Hereditary Genius_ in 1869, I
have written numerous memoirs, of which a list is given in an
earlier page, and which are scattered in various publications. They
may have appeared desultory when read in the order in which they
appeared, but as they had an underlying connection it seems worth
while to bring their substance together in logical sequence into a
single volume. I have revised, condensed, largely re-written,
transposed old matter, and interpolated much that is new; but traces
of the fragmentary origin of the work still remain, and I do not
regret them. They serve to show that the book is intended to be
suggestive, and renounces all claim to be encyclopedic. I have indeed,
with that object, avoided going into details in not a few cases
where I should otherwise have written with fulness, especially in
the Anthropometric part. My general object has been to take note of
the varied hereditary faculties of different men, and of the great
differences in different families and races, to learn how far
history may have shown the practicability of supplanting inefficient
human stock by better strains, and to consider whether it might not
be our duty to do so by such efforts as may be reasonable, thus
exerting ourselves to further the ends of evolution more rapidly and
with less distress than if events were left to their own course. The
subject is, however, so entangled with collateral considerations
that a straightforward step-by-step inquiry did not seem to be the
most suitable course. I thought it safer to proceed like the
surveyor of a new country, and endeavour to fix in the first
instance as truly as I could the position of several cardinal points.
The general outline of the results to which I finally arrived became
more coherent and clear as this process went on; they are brieflv
summarised in the concluding chapter.




VARIETY OF HUMAN NATURE.

We must free our minds of a great deal of prejudice before we can
rightly judge of the direction in which different races need to be
improved. We must be on our guard against taking our own instincts
of what is best and most seemly, as a criterion for the rest of
mankind. The instincts and faculties of different men and races
differ in a variety of ways almost as profoundly as those of animals
in different cages of the Zoological Gardens; and however diverse and
antagonistic they are, each may be good of its kind. It is obviously
so in brutes; the monkey may have a horror at the sight of a snake,
and a repugnance to its ways, but a snake is just as perfect an
animal as a monkey. The living world does not consist of a
repetition of similar elements, but of an endless variety of them,
that have grown, body and soul, through selective influences into
close adaptation to their contemporaries, and to the physical
circumstances of the localities they inhabit. The moral and
intellectual wealth of a nation largely consists in the multifarious
variety of the gifts of the men who compose it, and it would be the
very reverse of improvement to make all its members assimilate to a
common type. However, in every race of domesticated animals, and
especially in the rapidly-changing race of man, there are elements,
some ancestral and others the result of degeneration, that are of
little or no value, or are positively harmful. We may, of course, be
mistaken about some few of these, and shall find in our fuller
knowledge that they subserve the public good in some indirect manner;
but, notwithstanding this possibility, we are justified in roundly
asserting that the natural characteristics of every human race admit
of large improvement in many directions easy to specify.

I do not, however, offer a list of these, but shall confine myself
to directing attention to a very few hereditary characteristics of a
marked kind, some of which are most desirable and others greatly the
reverse; I shall also describe new methods of appraising and
defining them. Later on in the book I shall endeavour to define the
place and duty of man in the furtherance of the great scheme of
evolution, and I shall show that he has already not only adapted
circumstance to race, but also, in some degree and often
unconsciously, race to circumstance; and that his unused powers in
the latter direction are more considerable than might have been
thought.

It is with the innate moral and intellectual faculties that the book
is chiefly concerned, but they are so closely bound up with the
physical ones that these must be considered as well. It is, moreover,
convenient to take them the first, so I will begin with the features.




FEATURES.

The differences in human features must be reckoned great, inasmuch
as they enable us to distinguish a single known face among those of
thousands of strangers, though they are mostly too minute for
measurement. At the same time, they are exceedingly numerous. The
general expression of a face is the sum of a multitude of small
details, which are viewed in such rapid succession that we seem to
perceive them all at a single glance. If any one of them disagrees
with the recollected traits of a known face, the eye is quick at
observing it, and it dwells upon the difference. One small
discordance overweighs a multitude of similarities and suggests a
general unlikeness; just as a single syllable in a sentence
pronounced with a foreign accent makes one cease to look upon the
speaker as a countryman. If the first rough sketch of a portrait be
correct so far as it goes, it may be pronounced an excellent likeness;
but a rough sketch does not go far; it contains but few traits for
comparison with the original. It is a suggestion, not a likeness; it
must be coloured and shaded with many touches before it can really
resemble the face, and whilst this is being done the maintenance of
the likeness is imperilled at every step. I lately watched an able
artist painting a portrait, and endeavoured to estimate the number
of strokes with his brush, every one of which was thoughtfully and
firmly given. During fifteen sittings of three working hours
each--that is to say, during forty-five hours, or two thousand four
hundred minutes--he worked at the average rate of ten strokes of the
brush per minute. There were, therefore, twenty-four thousand
separate traits in the completed portrait, and in his opinion some,
I do not say equal, but comparably large number of units of
resemblance with the original.

The physiognomical difference between different men being so
numerous and small, it is impossible to measure and compare them
each to each, and to discover by ordinary statistical methods the
true physiognomy of a race. The usual way is to select individuals
who are judged to be representatives of the prevalent type, and to
photograph them; but this method is not trustworthy, because the
judgment itself is fallacious. It is swayed by exceptional and
grotesque features more than by ordinary ones, and the portraits
supposed to be typical are likely to be caricatures. One fine Sunday
afternoon I sat with a friend by the walk in Kensington Gardens that
leads to the bridge, and which on such occasions is thronged by
promenaders. It was agreed between us that whichever first caught
sight of a typical John Bull should call the attention of the other.
We sat and watched keenly for many minutes, but neither of us found
occasion to utter a word.

The prevalent type of English face has greatly changed at different
periods, for after making large allowance for the fashion in
portrait painting of the day, there remains a great difference
between the proportion in which certain casts of features are to be
met with at different dates. I have spent some time in studying the
photographs of the various portraits of English worthies that have
been exhibited at successive loan collections, or which are now in
the National Portrait Gallery, and have traced what appear to be
indisputable signs of one predominant type of face supplanting
another. For instance, the features of the men painted by and about
the time of Holbein have usually high cheekbones, long upper lips,
thin eyebrows, and lank dark hair. It would be impossible, I think,
for the majority of modern Englishmen so to dress themselves and
clip and arrange their hair, as to look like the majority of these
portraits.

Englishmen are now a fair and reddish race, as may be seen from the
Diagram, taken from the Report of the Anthropometric Committee to
the British Association in 1880 and which gives the proportion in
which the various colours of hair are found among our professional
classes.

[Illustration: ]

I take the professional classes because they correspond with the
class of English worthies better than any of the others from which
returns have been collected. The Diagram, however, gives a fair
representation of other classes of the community. For instance, I
have analysed the official records of the very carefully-selected
crews of H.M. S. _Alert_ and _Discovery_ in the Arctic Expedition of
1875-6, and find the proportion of various shades of hair to be the
same among them as is shown in the Diagram. Seven-tenths of the
crews had complexions described as light, fair, fresh, ruddy or
freckled, and the same proportion had blue or gray eyes. They would
have contrasted strongly with Cromwell's regiment of Ironsides, who
were recruited from the dark-haired men of the fen districts, and
who are said to have left the impression on contemporary observers
as being men of a peculiar breed. They would also probably have
contrasted with any body of thoroughgoing Puritan soldiers taken at
haphazard; for there is a prevalence of dark hair among men of
atrabilious and sour temperament.

If we may believe caricaturists, the fleshiness and obesity of many
English men and women in the earlier years of this century must have
been prodigious. It testifies to the grosser conditions of life in
those days, and makes it improbable that the types best adapted to
prevail then would be the best adapted to prevail now.




COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE.

As a means of getting over the difficulty of procuring really
representative faces, I contrived the method of composite portraiture,
which has been explained of late on many occasions, and of which a
full account will be found in Appendix A. The principle on which the
composites are made will best be understood by a description of my
earlier and now discarded method; it was this--(1) I collected
photographic portraits of different persons, all of whom had been
photographed in the same aspect (say full face), and under the same
conditions of light and shade (say with the light coming from the
right side). (2) I reduced their portraits photographically to the
same size, being guided as to scale by the distance between any two
convenient points of reference in the features; for example, by the
vertical distance between two parallel lines, one of which passed
through the middle of the pupils of the eyes and the other between
the lips. (3) I superimposed the portraits like the successive
leaves of a book, so that the features of each portrait lay as
exactly as the case admitted, in front of those of the one behind it,
eye in front of eye and mouth in front of mouth. This I did by
holding them successively to the light and adjusting them, then by
fastening each to the preceding one with a strip of gummed paper
along one of the edges. Thus I obtained a book, each page of which
contained a separate portrait, and all the portraits lay exactly in
front of one another. (4) I fastened the book against the wall in
such a way that I could turn over the pages in succession, leaving
in turn each portrait flat and fully exposed. (5) I focused my
camera on the book fixed it firmly, and put a sensitive plate inside
it. (6) I began photographing, taking one page after the other in
succession without moving the camera, but putting on the cap whilst I
was turning over the pages, so that an image of each of the
portraits in succession was thrown on the same part of the
sensitised plate.

Only a fraction of the exposure required to make a good picture was
allowed to each portrait. Suppose that period was twenty seconds,
and that there were ten portraits, then an exposure of two seconds
would be allowed for each portrait, making twenty seconds in all.
This is the principle of the process, the details of that which I
now use are different and complex. They are fully explained in the
Appendix for the use of those who may care to know about them.

The effect of composite portraiture is to bring into evidence all
the traits in which there is agreement, and to leave but a ghost of
a trace of individual peculiarities. There are so many traits in
common in all faces that the composite picture when made from many
components is far from being a blur; it has altogether the look of
an ideal composition.

It may be worth mentioning that when I take any small bundle of
portraits, selected at hazard, I have generally found it easy to
sort them into about five groups, four of which have enough
resemblance among themselves to make as many fairly clear composites,
while the fifth consists of faces that are too incongruous to be
grouped in a single class. In dealing with portraits of brothers and
sisters, I can generally throw most of them into a single group, with
success.

In the small collection of composites given in the Plate facing p. 8,
I have purposely selected many of those that I have previously
published, and whose originals, on a larger scale, I have at various
times exhibited, together with their components, in order to put the
genuineness of the results beyond doubt. Those who see them for the
first time can hardly believe but that one dominant face has
overpowered the rest, and that they are composites only in name. When,
however, the details are examined, this objection disappears. It is
true that with careless photography one face may be allowed to
dominate, but with the care that ought to be taken, and with the
precautions described in the Appendix, that does not occur. I have
often been amused when showing composites and their components to
friends, to hear a strong expression of opinion that the
predominance of one face was evident, and then on asking which face
it was, to discover that they disagreed. I have even known a
composite in which one portrait seemed unduly to prevail, to be
remade without the component in question, and the result to be much
the same as before, showing that the reason of the resemblance was
that the rejected portrait had a close approximation to the ideal
average picture of the rest.

These small composites give a better notion of the utmost capacity
of the process than the larger ones, from which they are reduced.
In the latter, the ghosts of individual peculiarities are more
visible, and usually the equal traces left by every member of a
moderately-sized group can be made out by careful inspection; but it
is hardly possible to do this in the pictures in the Plate, except
in a good light and in a very few of the cases. On the other hand,
the larger pictures do not contain more detail of value than the
smaller ones.


DESCRIPTION OF THE COMPOSITES.

The medallion of Alexander the Great was made by combining the
images of six different medals, with a view of obtaining the type of
features that the makers of those medals concurred in desiring to
ascribe to him. The originals were kindly selected for me by Mr. R.
Stuart Poole from the collection in the British Museum. This
composite was one of the first I ever made, and is printed together
with its six components in the _Journal of the Royal Institution_,
in illustration of a lecture I gave there in April 1879. It seems to
me that it is possible on this principle to obtain a truer likeness
of a man than in any other way. Every artist makes mistakes; but by
combining the conscientious works of many artists, their separate
mistakes disappear, and what is common to all of their works remains.
So as regards different photographs of the same person, those
accidental momentary expressions are got rid of, which an ordinary
photograph made by a brief exposure cannot help recording. On the
other hand, any happy sudden trait of expression is lost. The
composite gives the features in repose.

The next pair of composites (full face and profile) on the Plate has
not been published before. The interest of the pair lies chiefly in
their having been made from only two components, and they show how
curiously even two faces that have a moderate family likeness will
blend into a single one. That neither of these predominated in the
present case will be learned from the following letter by the father
of the ladies, who is himself a photographer:--

"I am exceedingly obliged for the very curious and interesting
composite portraits of my two children. Knowing the faces so well,
it caused me quite a surprise when I opened your letter. I put one
of the full faces on the table for the mother to pick up casually.
She said, 'When did you do this portrait of A? how _like_ she is to B!
Or _is_ it B? I never thought they were so like before.'  It has
puzzled several people to say whether the profile was intended for A
or B. Then I tried one of them on a friend who has not seen the
girls for years. He said, 'Well, it is one of the family for certain,
but I don't know which.'"

[Illustration: ]

I have made several other family portraits, which to my eye seem
great successes, but must candidly own that the persons whose
portraits are blended together seldom seem to care much for the
result, except as a curiosity. We are all inclined to assert our
individuality, and to stand on our own basis, and to object to being
mixed up indiscriminately with others. The same feeling finds
expression when the resident in a suburban street insists on calling
his house a villa with some fantastic name, and refuses, so long as
he can, to call it simply Number so and so in the street.

The last picture in the upper row shows the easy way in which young
and old, male and female, combine to form an effective picture. The
components consist in this case of the father and mother, two sons,
and two daughters. I exhibited the original of this, together with
the portraits from which it was taken, at the Loan Photographic
Exhibition at the Society of Arts in February 1882. I also sent
copies of the original of this same composite to several amateur
photographers, with a circular letter asking them to get from me
family groups for the purpose of experiments, to see how far the
process was suitable for family portraiture.

The middle row of portraits illustrates health, disease, and
criminality. For health, I have combined the portraits of twelve
officers of the Royal Engineers with about an equal number of
privates, which were taken for me by Lieutenant Darwin, R.E. The
individuals from whom this composite was made, which has not come
out as clearly as I should have liked, differed considerably in
feature, and they came from various parts of England. The points they
had in common were the bodily and mental qualifications required for
admission into their select corps, and their generally British
descent. The result is a composite having an expression of
considerable vigour, resolution, intelligence, and frankness. I have
exhibited both this and others that were made respectively from the
officers, from the whole collection of privates--thirty-six in
number--and from that selected portion of them that is utilised in
the present instance.

This face and the qualities it connotes probably gives a clue to the
direction in which the stock of the English race might most easily
be improved. It is the essential notion of a race that there should
be some ideal typical form from which the individuals may deviate in
all directions, but about which they chiefly cluster, and towards
which their descendants will continue to cluster. The easiest
direction in which a race can be improved is towards that central
type, because nothing new has to be sought out. It is only necessary
to encourage as far as practicable the breed of those who conform
most nearly to the central type, and to restrain as far as may be
the breed of those who deviate widely from it. Now there can hardly
be a more appropriate method of discovering the central
physiognomical type of any race or group than that of composite
portraiture.

As a contrast to the composite of the Royal Engineers, I give those
of two of the coarse and low types of face found among the criminal
classes. The photographs from which they were made are taken from
two large groups. One are those of men undergoing severe sentences
for murder and other crimes connected with violence; the other of
thieves. They were reprints from those taken by order of the prison
authorities for purposes of identification. I was allowed to obtain
copies for use in my inquiries by the kind permission of Sir Edmund
Du Cane, H.M. Director of Prisons. The originals of these and their
components have frequently been exhibited. It is unhappily a fact
that fairly distinct types of criminals breeding true to their kind
have become established, and are one of the saddest disfigurements
of modern civilisation. To this subject I shall recur.

I have made numerous composites of various groups of convicts, which
are interesting negatively rather than positively. They produce
faces of a mean description, with no villainy written on them. The
individual faces are villainous enough, but they are villainous in
different ways, and when they are combined, the individual
peculiarities disappear, and the common humanity of a low type is all
that is left.

The remaining portraits are illustrations of the application of the
process to the study of the physiognomy of disease. They were
published a year ago with many others, together with several of
the portraits from which they were derived, in a joint memoir by
Dr. Mahomed and myself, in vol. xxv. of the _Guy's Hospital Reports_.
The originals and all the components have been exhibited on several
occasions.

In the lower division of the Plate will be found three composites,
each made from a large number of faces, unselected, except on the
ground of the disease under which they were suffering. When only few
portraits are used, there must be some moderate resemblance between
them, or the result would be blurred; but here, dealing with as many
as 56, 100, and 50 cases respectively, the combination of any medley
group results in an ideal expression.

It will be observed that the composite of 56 female faces is made by
the blending of two other composites, both of which are given. The
history was this--I took the 56 portraits and sorted them into two
groups; in the first of these were 20 portraits that showed a
tendency to thin features, in the other group there were 36 that
showed a tendency to thickened features. I made composites of each
of them as shown in the Plate. Now it will be remarked that,
notwithstanding the attempt to make two contrasted groups, the
number of mediocre cases was so great that the composities of the
two groups are much alike. If I had divided the 56 into two
haphazard groups, the results would have been closely alike, as I
know from abundant experience of the kind. The co-composite of the
two will be observed to have an intermediate expression. The test
and measure of statistical truth lies in the degree of accordance
between results obtained from different batches of instances of the
same generic class. It will be gathered from these instances that
composite portraiture may attain statistical constancy, within
limits not easily distinguished by the eye, after some 30 haphazard
portraits of the same class have been combined. This at least has
been my experience thus far.

The two faces illustrative of the same type of tubercular disease
are very striking; the uppermost is photographically interesting as
a case of predominance of one peculiarity, happily of no harm to the
effect of the ideal wan face. It is that one of the patients had a
sharply-checked black and white scarf, whose pattern has asserted
itself unduly in the composite. In such cases I ought to throw the
too clearly defined picture a little out of focus. The way in which
the varying brightness of different pictures is reduced to a uniform
standard of illumination is described in the Appendix.

It must be clearly understood that these portraits do not profess to
give the whole story of the physiognomy of phthisis. I have not room
to give illustrations of other types--namely, that with coarse and
blunted features, or the strumous one, nor any of the intermediates.
These have been discussed chiefly by Dr. Mahomed in the memoir
alluded to above.

In the large experience I have had of sorting photographs, literally
by the thousand, while making experiments with composites, I have
been struck by certain general impressions. The consumptive patients
consisted of many hundred cases, including a considerable proportion
of very ignoble specimens of humanity. Some were scrofulous and
misshapen, or suffered from various loathsome forms of inherited
disease; most were ill nourished. Nevertheless, in studying their
portraits the pathetic interest prevailed, and I returned day after
day to my tedious work of classification, with a liking for my
materials. It was quite otherwise with the criminals. I did not
adequately appreciate the degradation of their expressions for some
time; at last the sense of it took firm hold of me, and I cannot now
handle the portraits without overcoming by an effort the aversion
they suggest.

I am sure that the method of composite portraiture opens a fertile
field of research to ethnologists, but I find it very difficult to
do much single-handed, on account of the difficulty of obtaining the
necessary materials. As a rule, the individuals must be specially
photographed. The portraits made by artists are taken in every
conceivable aspect and variety of light and shade, but for the
purpose in question the aspect and the shade must be the same
throughout. Group portraits would do to work from, were it not for
the strong out-of-door light under which they are necessarily taken,
which gives an unwonted effect to the expression of the faces. Their
scale also is too small to give a sufficiently clear picture when
enlarged. I may say that the scale of the portraits need not be
uniform, as my apparatus enlarges or reduces as required, at the
same time that it superposes the images; but the portraits of the
heads should never be less than twice the size of that of the Queen
on a halfpenny piece.

I heartily wish that amateur photographers would seriously take up
the subject of composite portraiture as applied to different
sub-types of the varying races of men. I have already given more
time to perfecting the process and experimenting with it than I can
well spare.



BODILY QUALITIES.

The differences in the bodily qualities that are the usual subjects
of anthropometry are easily dealt with, and are becoming widely
registered in many countries. We are unfortunately destitute of
trustworthy measurements of Englishmen of past generations to enable
us to compare class with class, and to learn how far the several
sections of the English nation may be improving or deteriorating. We
shall, however, hand useful information concerning our own times to
our successors, thanks principally to the exertions of an
Anthropometric Committee established five years ago by the British
Association, who have collected and partly classified and published
a large amount of facts, besides having induced several institutions,
such as Marlborough College, to undertake a regular system of
anthropometric record. I am not, however, concerned here with the
labours of this committee, nor with the separate valuable
publications of some of its members, otherwise than in one small
particular which appears to show that the English population as a
whole, or perhaps I should say the urban portion of it, is in some
sense deteriorating. It is that the average stature of the older
persons measured by or for the committee has not been found to
decrease steadily with their age, but sometimes the reverse.[1] This
contradicts observations made on the heights of the same men at
different periods, whose stature after middle age is invariably
reduced by the shrinking of the cartilages. The explanation offered
was that the statistical increase of stature with age should be
ascribed to the survival of the more stalwart. On reconsideration, I
am inclined to doubt the adequacy of the explanation, and partly to
account for the fact by a steady, slight deterioration of stature in
successive years; in the urban population owing to the conditions of
their lives, and in the rural population owing to the continual
draining away of the more stalwart of them to the towns.

It cannot be doubted that town life is harmful to the town population.
I have myself investigated its effect on fertility (see Appendix B),
and found that taking on the one hand a number of rural parishes,
and on the other hand the inhabitants of a medium town, the former
reared, nearly twice as many adult grandchildren as the latter. The
vital functions are so closely related that an inferiority in the
production of healthy children very probably implies a loss of
vigour generally, one sign of which is a diminution of stature.

Though the bulk of the population may deteriorate, there are many
signs that the better housed and fed portion of it improves. In the
earlier years of this century the so-called manly sports of boxing
and other feats of strength ranked high among the national amusements.
A man who was [1] successful in these became the hero of a large and
demonstrative circle of admirers, and it is to be presumed that the
best boxer, the best pedestrian, and so forth, was the best adapted
to succeed, through his natural physical gifts. If he was not the
most gifted man in those respects in the whole kingdom, he was
certainly one of the most gifted of them. It therefore does no
injustice to the men of that generation to compare the feats of
their foremost athletes with those of ours who occupy themselves in
the same way. The comparison would probably err in their favour,
because the interest in the particular feats in which our
grandfathers and great-grandfathers delighted are not those that
chiefly interest the present generation, and notwithstanding our
increased population, there are fewer men now who attempt them. In
the beginning of this century there were many famous walking matches,
and incomparably the best walker was Captain Barclay of Ury. His
paramount feat, which was once very familiar to the elderly men of
the present time, was that of walking a thousand miles in a thousand
hours, but of late years that feat has been frequently equalled and
overpassed. I am willing to allow much influence to the modern
conditions of walking under shelter and subject to improved methods
of training (Captain Barclay himself originated the first method,
which has been greatly improved since his time); still the fact
remains that in executing this particular feat, the athletes of the
present day are more successful than those who lived some eighty
years ago. I may be permitted to give an example bearing on the
increased stature of the better housed and fed portion of the nation,
in a recollection of my own as to the difference in height between
myself and my fellow-collegians at Trinity College, Cambridge, in
1840-4. My height is 5 feet 9-3/4 inches, and I recollect perfectly
that among the crowd of undergraduates I stood somewhat taller than
the majority. I generally looked a little downward when I met their
eyes. In later years, whenever I have visited Cambridge, I have
lingered in the ante-chapel and repeated the comparison, and now I
find myself decidedly shorter than the average of the students. I
have precisely the same kind of recollection and the same present
experience of the height of crowds of well-dressed persons. I used
always to get a fair view of what was going on over or between their
heads; I rarely can do so now.

[Footnote 1: _Trans. Brit. Assoc_., 1881, Table V., p. 242; and
remarks by Mr. Roberts, p. 235.]


The athletic achievements at school and college are much superior to
what they used to be. Part is no doubt due to more skilful methods
of execution, but not all. I cannot doubt that the more wholesome
and abundant food, the moderation in drink, the better cooking, the
warmer wearing apparel, the airier sleeping rooms, the greater
cleanliness, the more complete change in holidays, and the healthier
lives led by the women in their girlhood, who become mothers
afterwards, have a great influence for good on the favoured portion
of our race.

The proportion of weakly and misshapen individuals is not to be
estimated by those whom we meet in the streets; the worst cases are
out of sight. We should parade before our mind's eye the inmates of
the lunatic, idiot, and pauper asylums, the prisoners, the patients
in hospitals, the sufferers at home, the crippled, and the
congenitally blind, and that large class of more or less wealthy
persons who flee to the sunnier coasts of England, or expatriate
themselves for the chance of life. There can hardly be a sadder
sight than the crowd of delicate English men and women with narrow
chests and weak chins, scrofulous, and otherwise gravely affected,
who are to be found in some of these places. Even this does not tell
the whole of the story; if there were a conscription in England, we
should find, as in other countries, that a large fraction of the men
who earn their living by sedentary occupations are unfit for
military service. Our human civilised stock is far more weakly
through congenital imperfection than that of any other species of
animals, whether wild or domestic.

It is, however, by no means the most shapely or the biggest
personages who endure hardship the best. Some very shabby-looking
men have extraordinary stamina. Sickly-looking and puny residents in
towns may have a more suitable constitution for the special
conditions of their lives, and may in some sense be better knit and
do more work and live longer than much haler men imported to the
same locality from elsewhere. A wheel and a barrel seem to have the
flimsiest possible constitutions; they consist of numerous separate
pieces all oddly shaped, which, when lying in a heap, look
hopelessly unfitted for union; but put them properly together,
compress them with a tire in the one case and with hoops in the other,
and a remarkably enduring organisation will result. A wheel with a
ton weight on the top of it in the waggons of South Africa will jolt
for thousands of miles over stony, roadless country without
suffering harm; a keg of water may be strapped on the back of a
pack-ox or a mule, and be kicked off and trampled on, and be
otherwise misused for years, without giving way.

I do not propose to enter further into the anthropometric
differences of race, for the subject is a very large one, and this
book does not profess to go into detail. Its intention is to touch
on various topics more or less connected with that of the
cultivation of race, or, as we might call it, with "eugenic" [1]
questions, and to present the results of several of my own separate
investigations.




ENERGY.

Energy is the capacity for labour. It is consistent with all the
robust virtues, and makes a large practice of them possible. It is
the measure of fulness of life; the more energy the more abundance
of it; no energy at all is death; idiots are feeble and listless. In
the inquiries I made on the antecedents of men of science no points
came out more strongly than that the leaders of scientific thought
were generally gifted with remarkable energy, and that they had
[2] inherited the gift of it from their parents and grandparents. I
have since found the same to be the case in other careers.

[Footnote 2: That is, with questions bearing on what is termed in
Greek, _eugenes_, namely, good in stock, hereditarily endowed with
noble qualities. This, and the allied words, _eugeneia_, etc., are
equally applicable to men, brutes, and plants. We greatly want a
brief word to express the science of improving stock, which is by no
means confined to questions of judicious mating, but which,
especially in the case of man, takes cognisance of all influences
that tend in however remote a degree to give to the more suitable
races or strains of blood a better chance of prevailing speedily
over the less suitable than they otherwise would have had. The word
_eugenics_ would sufficiently express the idea; it is at least a
neater word and a more generalised one than _viriculture_, which I
once ventured to use.]

Energy is an attribute of the higher races, being favoured beyond
all other qualities by natural selection. We are goaded into
activity by the conditions and struggles of life. They afford
stimuli that oppress and worry the weakly, who complain and bewail,
and it may be succumb to them, but which the energetic man welcomes
with a good-humoured shrug, and is the better for in the end.

The stimuli may be of any description: the only important matter is
that all the faculties should be kept working to prevent their
perishing by disuse. If the faculties are few, very simple stimuli
will suffice. Even that of fleas will go a long way. A dog is
continually scratching himself, and a bird pluming itself, whenever
they are not occupied with food, hunting, fighting, or love. In
those blank times there is very little for them to attend to besides
their varied cutaneous irritations. It is a matter of observation
that well washed and combed domestic pets grow dull; they miss the
stimulus of fleas. If animals did not prosper through the agency of
their insect plagues, it seems probable that their races would long
since have been so modified that their bodies should have ceased to
afford a pasture-ground for parasites.

It does not seem to follow that because men are capable of doing
hard work they like it. Some, indeed, fidget and fret if they cannot
otherwise work off their superfluous steam; but on the other hand
there are many big lazy fellows who will not get up their steam to
full pressure except under compulsion. Again, the character of the
stimulus that induces hard work differs greatly in different persons;
it may be wealth, ambition, or other object of passion. The solitary
hard workers, under no encouragement or compulsion except their
sense of duty to their generation, are unfortunately still rare
among us.

It may be objected that if the race were too healthy and energetic
there would be insufficient call for the exercise of the pitying and
self-denying virtues, and the character of men would grow harder in
consequence. But it does not seem reasonable to preserve sickly
breeds for the sole purpose of tending them, as the breed of foxes
is preserved solely for sport and its attendant advantages. There is
little fear that misery will ever cease from the land, or that the
compassionate will fail to find objects for their compassion; but at
present the supply vastly exceeds the demand: the land is
overstocked and overburdened with the listless and the incapable.

In any scheme of eugenics, energy is the most important quality to
favour; it is, as we have seen, the basis of living action, and it
is eminently transmissible by descent.




SENSITIVITY.

The only information that reaches us concerning outward events
appears to pass through the avenue of our senses; and the more
perceptive the senses are of difference, the larger is the field
upon which our judgment and intelligence can act. Sensation mounts
through a series of grades of "just perceptible differences." It
starts from the zero of consciousness, and it becomes more intense
as the stimulus increases (though at a slower rate) up to the point
when the stimulus is so strong as to begin to damage the nerve
apparatus. It then yields place to pain, which is another form of
sensation, and which continues until the nerve apparatus is destroyed.
Two persons may be equally able just to hear the same faint sound,
and they may equally begin to be pained by the same loud sound, and
yet they may differ as to the number of intermediate grades of
sensation. The grades will be less numerous as the organisation is
of a lower order, and the keenest sensation possible to it will in
consequence be less intense. An artist who is capable of
discriminating more differences of tint than another man is not
necessarily more capable of seeing clearly in twilight, or more or
less intolerant of sunshine. A musician is not necessarily able to
hear very faint sounds, nor to be more startled by loud sounds than
others are. A mechanic who works hard with heavy tools and has rough
and grimy thumbs, insensible to very slight pressures, may yet have
a singularly discriminating power of touch in respect to the
pressures that he can feel.

The discriminative faculty of idiots is curiously low; they hardly
distinguish between heat and cold, and their sense of pain is so
obtuse that some of the more idiotic seem hardly to know what it is.
In their dull lives, such pain as can be excited in them may
literally be accepted with a welcome surprise. During a visit to
Earlswood Asylum I saw two boys whose toe-nails had grown into the
flesh and had been excised by the surgeon. This is a horrible
torture to ordinary persons, but the idiot lads were said to have
shown no distress during the operation; it was not necessary to hold
them, and they looked rather interested at what was being done.
[1] I also saw a boy with the scar of a severe wound on his wrist;
the story being that he had first burned himself slightly by accident,
and, liking the keenness of the new sensation, he took the next
opportunity of repeating the experience, but, idiot-like, he overdid
it.

The trials I have as yet made on the sensitivity of different
persons confirms the reasonable expectation that it would on the
whole be highest among the intellectually ablest. At first, owing to
my confusing the quality of which I am speaking with that of nervous
irritability, I fancied that women of delicate nerves who are
distressed by noise, sunshine, etc., would have acute powers of
discrimination. But this I found not to be the case. In morbidly
sensitive persons both pain and sensation are induced by lower
stimuli than in the healthy, but the number of just perceptible
grades of sensation between them is not necessarily different.

I found as a rule that men have more delicate powers of
discrimination than women, and the business experience of life seems
to confirm this view. The tuners of pianofortes are men, and so I
understand are the tasters of tea and wine, the sorters of wool, and
the like. These latter occupations are well salaried, because it is
of the first moment to the merchant that he should be rightly advised
on the real value of what he is about to purchase or to sell. If the
sensitivity of women were superior to that of men, the self-interest
of merchants would lead to their being [3] always employed; but as
the reverse is the case, the opposite supposition is likely to be
the true one.

[Footnote 3: See "Remarks on Idiocy," by E.W. Graham, M. D.,
_Medical Journal_, January 16, 1875.]

Ladies rarely distinguish the merits of wine at the dinner-table,
and though custom allows them to preside at the breakfast-table, men
think them on the whole to be far from successful makers of tea and
coffee.

Blind persons are reputed to have acquired in compensation for the
loss of their eyesight an increased acuteness in their other senses;
I was therefore curious to make some trials with my test apparatus,
which I will describe in the next chapter. I was permitted to do so
on a number of boys at a large educational blind asylum, but found
that, although they were anxious to do their best, their performances
were by no means superior to those of other boys. It so happened
that the blind lads who showed the most delicacy of touch and won
the little prizes I offered to excite emulation, barely reached the
mediocrity of the various sighted lads of the same age whom I had
previously tested. I have made not a few observations and inquiries,
and find that the guidance of the blind depends mainly on the
multitude of collateral indications to which they give much heed,
and not in their superior sensitivity to any one of them. Those who
see do not care for so many of these collateral indications, and
habitually overlook and neglect several of them. I am convinced also
that not a little of the popular belief concerning the sensitivity
of the blind is due to exaggerated claims on their part that have
not been verified. Two instances of this have fallen within my own
experience, in both of which the blind persons claimed to have the
power of judging by the echo of their voice and by certain other
feelings, the one when they were approaching objects, even though
the object was so small as a handrail, and the other to tell how far
the door of the room in which he was standing was open. I used all
the persuasion I could to induce each of these persons to allow me
to put their assertions to the test; but it was of no use. The one
made excuses, the other positively refused. They had probably the
same tendency that others would have who happened to be defective in
any faculty that their comrades possessed, to fight bravely against
their disadvantage, and at the same time to be betrayed into some
overvaunting of their capacities in other directions. They would be
a little conscious of this, and would therefore shrink from being
tested.

The power of reading by touch is not so very wonderful. A former
Lord Chancellor of England, the late Lord Hatherley, when he was
advanced in years, lost his eyesight for some time owing to a
cataract, which was not ripe to be operated on. He assured me that
he had then learned and practised reading by touch very rapidly.
This fact may perhaps also serve as additional evidence of the
sensitivity of able men.

Notwithstanding many travellers' tales, I have thus far been
unsuccessful in obtaining satisfactory evidence of any general large
superiority of the senses of savages over those of civilised men. My
own experience, so far as it goes, of Hottentots, Damaras, and some
other wild races, went to show that their sense discrimination was
not superior to those of white men, even as regards keenness of
eyesight. An offhand observer is apt to err by assigning to a single
cause what is partly due to others as well. Thus, as regards eyesight,
a savage who is accustomed to watch oxen grazing at a distance
becomes so familiar with their appearance and habits that he can
identify particular animals and draw conclusions as to what they are
doing with an accuracy that may seem to strangers to be wholly
dependent on exceptional acuteness of vision. A sailor has the
reputation of keen sight because he sees a distant coast when a
landsman cannot make it out; the fact being that the landsman
usually expects a different appearance to what he has really to look
for, such as a very minute and sharp outline instead of a large,
faint blur. In a short time a landsman becomes quite as quick as a
sailor, and in some test experiments[1] he was found on the average
to be distinctly the superior. It is not surprising that this should
be so, as sailors in vessels of moderate size have hardly ever the
practice of focussing their eyes sharply upon objects farther off
than the length of the vessel or the top of the mast, say at a
distance of fifty paces. The horizon itself as seen from the deck,
[4] and under the most favourable circumstances, is barely four
miles off, and there is no sharpness of outline in the intervening
waves. Besides this, the life of a sailor is very unhealthy, as
shown by his growing old prematurely, and his eyes must be much
tried by foul weather and salt spray.

[Footnote 4: Gould's _Military and Anthropological Statistics_, p.
530. New York, 1869.]

We inherit our language from barbarous ancestors, and it shows
traces of its origin in the imperfect ways by which grades of
difference admit of being expressed. Suppose a pedestrian is asked
whether the knapsack on his back feels heavy. He cannot find a reply
in two words that cover more varieties than (1) very heavy, (2)
rather heavy, (3) moderate, (4) rather light, (5) very light. I once
took considerable pains in the attempt to draw up verbal scales of
more than five orders of magnitude, using those expressions only
that every cultivated person would understand in the same sense; but
I did not succeed. A series that satisfied one person was not
interpreted in the same sense by another.

The general intention of this chapter has been to show that a
delicate power of sense discrimination is an attribute of a high race,
and that it has not the drawback of being necessarily associated
with nervous irritability.




SEQUENCE OF TEST WEIGHTS.

I will now describe an apparatus I have constructed to test the
delicacy with which weights may be discriminated by handling them. I
do so because the principle on which it is based may be adopted in
apparatus for testing other senses, and its description and the
conditions of its use will illustrate the desiderata and
difficulties of all such investigations.

A series of test weights is a simple enough idea--the difficulty
lies in determining the particular sequence of weights that should
be employed. Mine form a geometric series, for the reason that when
stimuli of all kinds increase by geometric grades the sensations
they give rise to will increase by arithmetic grades, so long as the
stimulus is neither so weak as to be barely felt, nor so strong as
to excite fatigue. My apparatus, which is explained more fully in the
Appendix, consists of a number of common gun cartridge cases filled
with alternate layers of shot, wool, and wadding, and then closed in
the usual way. They are all identical in appearance, and may be said
to differ only in their specific gravities. They are marked in
numerical sequence with the register numbers, 1, 2, 3, etc., but
their weights are proportioned to the numbers of which 1, 2, 3, etc.,
are the logarithms, and consequently run in a geometric series.
Hence the numbers of the weights form a scale of equal degrees of
sensitivity. If a person can just distinguish between the weights
numbered 1 and 3, he can also just distinguish between 2 and 4, 3 and
5, and any other pair of weights of which the register number of
the one exceeds that of the other by 2. Again, his coarseness of
discrimination is exactly double of that of another person who can
just distinguish pairs of weights differing only by 1, such as 1 and
2, 2 and 3, 3 and 4, and so on. The testing is performed by handing
pairs of weights to the operatee until his power of discrimination
is approximately made out, and then to proceed more carefully. It is
best now, for reasons stated in the Appendix, to hand to the
operatee sequences of three weights at a time, after shuffling them.
These he has to arrange in their proper order, with his eyes shut,
and by the sense of their weight alone. The operator finally records
the scale interval that the operatee can just appreciate, as being
the true measure of the coarseness (or the inverse measure of the
delicacy) of the sensitivity of the operatee.

It is somewhat tedious to test many persons in succession, but any
one can test his own powers at odd and end times with ease and nicety,
if he happens to have ready access to suitable apparatus.

The use of tests, which, objectively speaking, run in a geometric
series, and subjectively in an arithmetic one, may be applied to
touch, by the use of wire-work of various degrees of fineness; to
taste, by stock bottles of solutions of salt, etc., of various
strengths; to smell, by bottles of attar of rose, etc., in various
degrees of dilution.

The tests show the sensitivity at the time they are made, and give
an approximate measure of the discrimination with which the operatee
habitually employs his senses. It does not measure his capacity for
discrimination, because the discriminative faculty admits of much
education, and the test results always show increased delicacy after
a little practice. However, the requirements of everyday life
educate all our faculties in some degree, and I have not found the
performances with test weights to improve much after a little
familiarity with their use. The weights have, as it were, to be
played with at first, then they must be tried carefully on three or
four separate occasions.

I did not at first find it at all an easy matter to make test
weights so alike as to differ in no other appreciable respect than
in their specific gravity, and if they differ and become known apart,
the knowledge so acquired will vitiate future judgments in various
indirect ways. Similarity in outward shape and touch was ensured by
the use of mechanically-made cartridge cases; dissimilarity through
any external stain was rendered of no hindrance to the experiment by
making the operatee handle them in a bag or with his eyes shut. Two
bodies may, however, be alike in weight and outward appearance and
yet behave differently when otherwise mechanically tested, and,
consequently, when they are handled. For example, take two eggs, one
raw and the other hard boiled, and spin them on the table; press the
finger for a moment upon either of them whilst it is still spinning:
if it be the hard-boiled egg it will stop as dead as a stone: if it
be the raw egg, after a little apparent hesitation, it will begin
again to rotate. The motion of its shell had alone been stopped; the
internal part was still rotating and this compelled the shell to
follow it. Owing to this cause, when we handle the two eggs, the one
feels "quick" and the other does not. Similarly with the cartridges,
when one is rather more loosely packed than the others the
difference is perceived on handling them. Or it may have one end
heavier than the other, or else its weight may not be equally
distributed round its axis, causing it to rest on the table with the
same part always lowermost; differences due to these causes are also
easily perceived when handling the cartridges. Again, one of two
similar cartridges may balance perfectly in all directions, but the
weight of one of them may be disposed too much towards the ends, as
in a dumb-bell, or gathered too much towards the centre. The period
of oscillation will differ widely in the two cases, as may be shown
by suspending the cartridges by strings round their middle so that
they shall hang horizontally, and then by a slight tap making them
spin to and fro round the string as an axis.

The touch is very keen in distinguishing all these peculiarities. I
have mentioned them, and might have added more, to show that
experiments on sensitivity have to be made in the midst of pitfalls
warily to be avoided. Our apparently simplest perceptions are very
complex. We hardly ever act on the information given by only one
element of one sense, and our sensitivity in any desired direction
cannot be rightly determined except by carefully-devised apparatus
judiciously used.




WHISTLES FOR AUDIBILITY OF SHRILL NOTES.

I contrived a small whistle for conveniently ascertaining the upper
limits of audible sound in different persons, which Dr. Wollaston
had shown to vary considerably. He used small pipes, and found much
difficulty in making them. I made a very small whistle from a brass
tube whose internal diameter was less than one-tenth of an inch in
diameter. A plug was fitted into the lower end of the tube, which
could be pulled out or pushed in as much as desired, thereby causing
the length of the bore of the whistle to be varied at will. When the
bore is long the note is low; when short, it is high. The plug was
graduated, so that the precise note produced by the whistle could be
determined by reading off the graduations and referring to a table.
(See Appendix.)

On testing different persons, I found there was a remarkable falling
off in the power of hearing high notes as age advanced. The persons
themselves were quite unconscious of their deficiency so long as
their sense of hearing low notes remained unimpaired. It is an only
too amusing experiment to test a party of persons of various ages,
including some rather elderly and self-satisfied personages. They
are indignant at being thought deficient in the power of hearing, yet
the experiment quickly shows that they are absolutely deaf to shrill
notes which the younger persons hear acutely, and they commonly
betray much dislike to the discovery. Every one has his limit, and
the limit at which sounds become too shrill to be audible to any
particular person can be rapidly determined by this little instrument.
Lord Rayleigh and others have found that sensitive flames are
powerfully affected by the vibrations of whistles that are too rapid
to be audible to ordinary ears.

I have tried experiments with all kinds of animals on their
powers of hearing shrill notes. I have gone through the whole
of the Zoological Gardens, using an apparatus arranged for the
purpose. It consists of one of my little whistles at the end of a
walking-stick--that is, in reality, a long tube; it has a bit of
india-rubber pipe under the handle, a sudden squeeze upon which
forces a little air into the whistle and causes it to sound. I hold
it as near as is safe to the ears of the animals, and when they are
quite accustomed to its presence and heedless of it, I make it sound;
then if they prick their ears it shows that they hear the whistle; if
they do not, it is probably inaudible to them. Still, it is very
possible that in some cases they hear but do not heed the sound. Of
all creatures, I have found none superior to cats in the power of
hearing shrill sounds; it is perfectly remarkable what a faculty
they have in this way. Cats, of course, have to deal in the dark
with mice, and to find them out by their squealing. Many people
cannot hear the shrill squeal of a mouse. Some time ago, singing
mice were exhibited in London, and of the people who went to hear
them, some could hear nothing, whilst others could hear a little, and
others again could hear much. Cats are differentiated by natural
selection until they have a power of hearing all the high notes made
by mice and other little creatures that they have to catch. A cat
that is at a very considerable distance, can be made to turn its ear
round by sounding a note that is too shrill to be audible by almost
any human ear. Small dogs also hear very shrill notes, but large
ones do not. I have walked through the streets of a town with an
instrument like that which I used in the Zoological Gardens, and
made nearly all the little dogs turn round, but not the large ones.
At Berne, where there appear to be more large dogs lying idly about
the streets than in any other town in Europe, I have tried the
whistle for hours together, on a great many large dogs, but could
not find one that heard it. Ponies are sometimes able to hear very
high notes. I once frightened a pony with one of these whistles in
the middle of a large field. My attempts on insect hearing have been
failures.




ANTHROPOMETRIC REGISTERS.

When shall we have anthropometric laboratories, where a man may,
when he pleases, get himself and his children weighed, measured, and
rightly photographed, and have their bodily faculties tested by the
best methods known to modern science? The records of growth of
numerous persons from childhood to age are required before it can be
possible to rightly appraise the effect of external conditions upon
development, and records of this kind are at present non-existent.
The various measurements should be accompanied by photographic
studies of the features in full face and in profile, and on the same
scale, for convenience of comparison.

We are all lazy in recording facts bearing on ourselves, but parents
are glad enough to do so in respect to their children, and they
would probably be inclined to avail themselves of a laboratory where
all that is required could be done easily and at small cost. These
domestic records would hereafter become of considerable biographical
interest. Every one of us in his mature age would be glad of a series
of pictures of himself from childhood onwards, accompanied by
physical records, and arranged consecutively with notes of current
events by their sides. Much more would he be glad of similar
collections referring to his father, mother, grandparents, and other
near relatives. It would be peculiarly grateful to the young to
possess likenesses of their parents and those whom they look upon as
heroes, taken when they were of the same age as themselves. Boys are
too apt to think of their parents as having always been elderly men,
because they have insufficient data to construct imaginary pictures
of them as they were in their youth.

The cost of taking photographs in batches is so small, and the time
occupied is so brief, when the necessary preparations have been made
and the sitters are ready at hand, that a practice of methodically
photographing schoolboys and members of other large institutions
might easily be established. I, for one, should dearly prize the
opportunity of visiting the places where I have been educated, and
of turning over pages showing myself and my companions as we were in
those days. But no such records exist; the institutions last and
flourish, the individuals who pass through them are dispersed and
leave few or no memorials behind. It seems a cruel waste of
opportunity not to make and keep these brief personal records in a
methodical manner. The fading of ordinary photographic prints is no
real objection to keeping a register, because they can now be
reproduced at small charge in permanent printers' ink, by the
autotype and other processes.

I have seen with admiration, and have had an opportunity of availing
myself of, the newly-established library of well-ordered folios at
the Admiralty, each containing a thousand pages, and each page
containing a brief summary of references to the life of a particular
seaman. There are already 80,000 pages, and owing to the excellent
organisation of the office it is a matter of perfect ease to follow
out any one of these references, and to learn every detail of the
service of any seaman. A brief register of measurements and events in
the histories of a large number of persons, previous to their
entering any institution and during their residence in it, need not
therefore be a difficult matter to those who may take it in hand
seriously and methodically.

The recommendation I would venture to make to my readers is to
obtain photographs and ordinary measurements periodically of
themselves and their children, making it a family custom to do so,
because, unless driven by some custom, the act will be postponed
until the opportunity is lost. Let those periodical photographs be
full and side views of the face on an adequate scale, adding any
others that may be wished, but not omitting these. As the portraits
accumulate have collections of them autotyped. Keep the prints
methodically in a family register, writing by their side careful
chronicles of illness and all such events as used to find a place on
the fly-leaf of the Bible of former generations, and inserting other
interesting personal facts and whatever anthropometric data can be
collected.

Those who care to initiate and carry on a family chronicle
illustrated by abundant photographic portraiture, will produce a
work that they and their children and their descendants in more
remote generations will assuredly be grateful for. The family tie
has a real as well as a traditional significance. The world is
beginning to awaken to the fact that the life of the individual is
in some real sense a prolongation of those of his ancestry. His
vigour, his character, and his diseases are principally derived from
theirs; sometimes his faculties are blends of ancestral qualities;
but more frequently they are mosaics, patches of resemblance to one
or other of them showing now here and now there. The life-histories
of our relatives are prophetic of our own futures; they are far more
instructive to us than those of strangers, far more fitted to
encourage and to forewarn us. If there be such a thing as a natural
birthright, I can conceive of none superior to the right of the
child to be informed, at first by proxy through his guardians, and
afterwards personally, of the life-history, medical and other, of
his ancestry. The child is thrust into existence without his having
any voice at all in the matter, and the smallest amend that those
who brought him here can make, is to furnish him with all the
guidance they can, including the complete life-histories of his near
progenitors.

The investigation of human eugenics--that is, of the conditions
under which men of a high type are produced--is at present extremely
hampered by the want of full family histories, both medical and
general, extending over three or four generations. There is no such
difficulty in investigating animal eugenics, because the generations
of horses, cattle, dogs, etc., are brief, and the breeder of any
such stock lives long enough to acquire a large amount of experience
from his own personal observation. A man, however, can rarely be
familiar with more than two or three generations of his
contemporaries before age has begun to check his powers; his working
experience must therefore be chiefly based upon records. Believing,
as I do, that human eugenics will become recognised before long as a
study of the highest practical importance, it seems to me that no
time ought to be lost in encouraging and directing a habit of
compiling personal and family histories. If the necessary materials
be brought into existence, it will require no more than zeal and
persuasiveness on the part of the future investigator to collect as
large a store of them as he may require.




UNCONSCIOUSNESS OF PECULIARITIES.

The importance of submitting our faculties to measurement lies in
the curious unconsciousness in which we are apt to live of our
personal peculiarities, and which our intimate friends often fail to
remark. I have spoken of the ignorance of elderly persons of their
deafness to high notes, but even the existence of such a peculiarity
as colour blindness was not suspected until the memoir of Dalton in
1794. That one person out of twenty-nine or thereabouts should be
unable to distinguish a red from a green, without knowing that he
had any deficiency of colour sense, and without betraying his
deficiency to his friends, seems perfectly incredible to the other
twenty-eight; yet as a matter of fact he rarely does either the one
or the other. It is hard to convince the colour-blind of their own
infirmity. I have seen curious instances of this: one was that of a
person by no means unpractised in physical research, who had been
himself tested in matching colours. He gave me his own version of
the result, to the effect that though he might perhaps have fallen a
little short of perfection as judged by over-refined tests, his
colour sense was for all practical purposes quite good. On the other
hand, the operator assured me that when he had toned the intensities
of a pure red and a pure green in a certain proportion, the person
ceased to be able to distinguish between them! Colour blindness is
often very difficult to detect, because the test hues and tints may
be discriminated by other means than by the normal colour sense.
Ordinary pigments are never pure, and the test colours may be
distinguished by those of their adventitious hues to which the
partly colour-blind man may be sensitive. We do not suspect
ourselves to be yellow-blind by candle light, because we enjoy
pictures in the evening nearly or perhaps quite as much as in the day
time; yet we may observe that a yellow primrose laid on the white
table-cloth wholly loses its colour by candle light, and becomes as
white as a snowdrop.

In the inquiries I made on the hereditary transmission of capacity,
I was often amused by the naive remark of men who had easily
distanced their competitors, that they ascribed their success to
their own exertions. They little recognised how much they owed to
their natural gifts of exceptional capacity and energy on the one
hand, and of exceptional love for their special work on the other.

In future chapters I shall give accounts of persons who have unusual
mental characteristics as regards imagery, visualised numerals,
colours connected with sounds and special associations of ideas,
being unconscious of their peculiarities; but I cannot anticipate
these subjects here, as they all require explanation. It will be
seen in the end how greatly metaphysicians and psychologists may err,
who assume their own mental operations, instincts, and axioms to be
identical with those of the rest of mankind, instead of being
special to themselves. The differences between men are profound, and
we can only be saved from living in blind unconsciousness of our own
mental peculiarities by the habit of informing ourselves as well as
we can of those of others. Examples of the success with which this
can be done will be found farther on in the book.

I may take this opportunity of remarking on the well-known
hereditary character of colour blindness in connection with the fact,
that it is nearly twice as prevalent among the Quakers as among the
rest of the community, the proportions being as 5.9 to 3.5 per cent.
[1] We might have expected an even larger ratio. Nearly every Quaker
is descended on both sides solely from members of a group of men and
women who segregated themselves from the rest of the world five or
six generations ago; one of their strongest opinions being that the
fine arts were worldly snares, and their most conspicuous practice
being to dress in drabs. A born artist could never have consented to
separate himself from his fellows on such grounds; he would have
felt the profession of those opinions [5] and their accompanying
practices to be a treason to his aesthetic nature. Consequently few
of the original stock of Quakers are likely to have had the
temperament that is associated with a love for colour, and it is in
consequence most reasonable to believe that a larger proportion of
colour-blind men would have been found among them than among the
rest of the population.

[Footnote 5: _Trans. Ophthalmological Soc_., 1881, p. 198.]

Again, Quakerism is a decreasing sect, weakened by yearly desertions
and losses, especially as the act of marriage with a person who is
not a member of the Society is necessarily followed by exclusion
from it. It is most probable that a large proportion of the
deserters would be those who, through reversion to some bygone
ancestor, had sufficient artistic taste to make a continuance of
Quaker practices too irksome to be endured. Hence the existing
members of the Society of Friends are a race who probably contained
in the first instance an unduly large proportion of colour-blind men,
and from whose descendants many of those who were not born colour
blind have year by year been drafted away. Both causes must have
combined with the already well-known tendency of colour blindness to
hereditary transmission, to cause it to become a characteristic of
their race. Dalton, who first discovered its existence, as a
personal peculiarity of his own, was a Quaker to his death; Young,
the discoverer of the undulatory theory of light, and who wrote
specially on colours, was a Quaker by birth, but he married outside
the body and so ceased to belong to it.





STATISTICAL METHODS.

The object of statistical science is to discover methods of
condensing information concerning large groups of allied facts into
brief and compendious expressions suitable for discussion. The
possibility of doing this is based on the constancy and continuity
with which objects of the same species are found to vary. That is to
say, we always find, after sorting any large number of such objects
in the order (let us suppose) of their lengths, beginning with the
shortest and ending with the tallest, and setting them side by side
like a long row of park palings between the same limits, their upper
outline will be identical. Moreover, it will run smoothly and not in
irregular steps. The theoretical interpretation of the smoothness of
outline is that the individual differences in the objects are caused
by different combinations of a large number of minute influences; and
as the difference between any two adjacent objects in a long row
must depend on the absence in one of them of some single influence,
or of only a few such, that were present in the other, the amount of
difference will be insensible. Whenever we find on trial that the
outline of the row is not a flowing curve, the presumption is that
the objects are not all of the same species, but that part are
affected by some large influence from which the others are free;
consequently there is a confusion of curves. This presumption is
never found to be belied.

It is unfortunate for the peace of mind of the statistician that the
influences by which the magnitudes, etc., of the objects are
determined can seldom if ever be roundly classed into large and small,
without intermediates. He is tantalised by the hope of getting hold
of sub-groups of sufficient size that shall contain no individuals
except those belonging strictly to the same species, and he is almost
constantly baffled. In the end he is obliged to exercise his
judgment as to the limit at which he should cease to subdivide. If
he subdivides very frequently, the groups become too small to have
statistical value; if less frequently, the groups will be less truly
specific.

A species may be defined as a group of objects whose individual
differences are wholly due to different combinations of the same set
of minute causes, no one of which is so powerful as to be able by
itself to make any sensible difference in the result. A well-known
mathematical consequence flows from this, which is also universally
observed as a fact, namely, that in all species the number of
individuals who differ from the average value, up to any given amount,
is much greater than the number who differ more than that amount,
and up to the double of it. In short, if an assorted series be
represented by upright lines arranged side by side along a
horizontal base at equal distances apart, and of lengths
proportionate to the magnitude of the quality in the corresponding
objects, then their shape will always resemble that shown in Fig. 1.

The form of the bounding curve resembles that which is called in
architectural language an ogive, from "augive," an old French word
for a cup, the figure being not unlike the upper half of a cup lying
sideways with its axis horizontal. In consequence of the multitude
of mediocre values, we always find that on either side of the
middlemost ordinate _Cc_, which is the median value and may be
accepted as the average, there is a much less rapid change of height
than elsewhere. If the figure were pulled out sideways to make it
accord with such physical conceptions as that of a row of men
standing side by side, the middle part of the curve would be
apparently horizontal.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

The mathematical conception of the curve is best expressed in Fig. 2,
where PQ represents any given deviation from the average value, and
the ratio of PO to AB represents the relative probability of its
occurrence. The equation to the curve and a discussion of its
properties will be found in the _Proceedings of the Royal Society_,
No. 198, 1879, by Dr. M'Alister. The title of the paper is the
"Law of the Geometric Mean," and it follows one by myself on
"The Geometric Mean in Vital and Social Statistics."

We can lay down the ogive of any quality, physical or mental,
whenever we are capable of judging which of any two members of the
group we are engaged upon has the larger amount of that quality. I
have called this the method of statistics by intercomparison. There
is no bodily or mental attribute in any race of individuals that can
be so dealt with, whether our judgment in comparing them be guided
by common-sense observation or by actual measurement, which cannot
be gripped and consolidated into an ogive with a smooth outline, and
thenceforward be treated in discussion as a single object.

It is easy to describe any given ogive which has been based upon
measurements, so that it may be drawn from the description with
approximate truth. Divide AB into a convenient number of fractional
parts, and record the height of the ordinates at those parts. In
reproducing the ogive from these data, draw a base line of any
convenient length, divide it in the same number of fractional parts,
erect ordinates of the stated lengths at those parts, connect their
tops with a flowing line, and the thing is done. The most convenient
fractional parts are the middle (giving the median), the outside
quarters (giving the upper and lower quartiles), and similarly the
upper and lower octiles or deciles. This is sufficient for most
purposes. It leaves only the outer eighths or tenths of the cases
undescribed and undetermined, except so far as may be guessed by,
the run of the intermediate portion of the curve, and it defines all
of the intermediate portion with as close an, approximation as is
needed for ordinary or statistical purposes.

Thus the heights of all but the outer tenths of the whole body of
adult males of the English professional classes may be derived from
the five following ordinates, measured in inches, of which the outer
pair are deciles:--

    67.2; 67.5; 68.8; 70.3; 71.4.

Many other instances will be found in the Report of the
Anthropometric Committee of the British Association in 1881,
pp. 245-257.

When we desire to compare any two large statistical groups, we may
compare median with median, quartiles with quartiles, and octiles
with octiles; or we may proceed on the method to be described in the
next paragraph but one.

We are often called upon to define the position of an individual in
his own series, in which case it is most conformable to usage to
give his centesimal grade--that is, his place on the base line
AB--supposing it to be graduated from 0 deg. to 100 deg. In reckoning
this, a confusion ought to be avoided between "graduation" and "rank,"
though it leads to no sensible error in practice. The first of the
"park palings" does not stand at A, which is 0 deg., nor does the
hundredth stand at B, which is 100 deg., for that would make 101 of them:
but they stand at 0 deg.5 and 99 deg.5 respectively. Similarly, all
intermediate _ranks_ stand half a degree short of the _graduation_
bearing the same number. When the class is large, the value of half
a place becomes extremely small, and the rank and graduation may be
treated as identical.

Examples of method of calculating a centesimal position:--

1. A child A is classed after examination as No. 5 in a class of 27
children; what is his centesimal graduation?

_Answer_.--If AB be divided into 27 graduations, his rank of No. 5
will correspond to the graduation 4 deg.5; therefore if AB be graduated
afresh into 100 graduations, his centesimal grade, x, will be found
by the Rule of Three, thus--

x : 4 deg.5 :: 100:27; x = 450 deg./27 = 16 deg.6.

2. Another child B is classed No. 13 in a class of 25 _Answer_.--If
AB be divided into 25 graduations, the rank of No. 13 will
correspond to graduation 12 deg.5, whence as before--

x : 12 deg.5 :: 100 : 25; x = 1250 deg./25 = 50 deg.; _i.e._ B is
the median.

The second method of comparing two statistical groups, to which I
alluded in the last paragraph but one, consists in stating the
centesimal grade in the one group that corresponds with the median
or any other fractional grade in the other. This, it will be remarked,
is a very simple method of comparison, absolutely independent of any
theory, and applicable to any statistical groups whatever, whether of
physical or of mental qualities. Wherever we can sort in order,
there we can apply this method. Thus, in the above examples, suppose
A and B had been selected because they were equal when compared
together, then we can concisely express the relative merits of the
two classes to which they respectively belong, by saying that 16 deg.6
in the one is equal to 50 deg. (the median) in the other.

I frequently make statistical records of form and feature, in the
streets or in company, without exciting attention, by means of a
fine pricker and a piece of paper. The pricker is a converted silver
pencil-case, with the usual sliding piece; it is a very small one,
and is attached to my watch chain. The pencil part has been taken
out and replaced by a fine short needle, the open mouth of the case
is covered with a hemispherical cap having a hole in the centre, and
the adjustments are such that when the slide is pushed forward as
far as it can go, the needle projects no more than one-tenth of an
inch. If I then press it upon a piece of paper, held against the
ball of my thumb, the paper is indelibly perforated with a fine hole,
and the thumb is not wounded. The perforations will not be found to
run into one another unless they are very numerous, and if they
happen to do so now and then, it is of little consequence in a
statistical inquiry. The holes are easily counted at leisure, by
holding the paper against the light, and any scrap of paper will
serve the purpose. It will be found that the majority of inquiries
take the form of "more," "equal to," or "less," so I arrange the
paper in a way to present three distinct compartments to the pricker,
and to permit of its being held in the correct position and used by
the sense of touch alone. I do so by tearing the paper into the form
of a cross--that is, maimed in one of its arms--and hold it by the
maimed part between the thumb and finger, the head of the cross
pointing upward. The head of the cross receives the pricks referring
to "more"; the solitary arm that is not maimed, those meaning
"the same"; the long foot of the cross those meaning "less." It is
well to write the subject of the measurement on the paper before
beginning to use it, then more than one set of records can be kept
in the pocket at the same time, and be severally added to as occasion
serves, without fear of mistaking one for the other.

[Illustration: ]




CHARACTER.

The fundamental and intrinsic differences of character that exist in
individuals are well illustrated by those that distinguish the two
sexes, and which begin to assert themselves even in the nursery,
where all the children are treated alike. One notable peculiarity in
the character of the woman is that she is capricious and coy, and
has less straightforwardness than the man. It is the same in the
female of every sex about the time of pairing, and there can be
little doubt as to the origin of the peculiarity. If any race of
animals existed in whom the sexual passions of the female were as
quickly and as directly stirred as those of the male, each would
mate with the first who approached her, and one essential condition
of sexual selection would be absent. There would be no more call for
competition among the males for the favour of each female; no more
fighting for love, in which the strongest male conquers; no more
rival display of personal charms, in which the best-looking or
best-mannered prevails. The drama of courtship, with its prolonged
strivings and doubtful success, would be cut quite short, and the
race would degenerate through the absence of that sexual selection
for which the protracted preliminaries of love-making give
opportunity. The willy-nilly disposition of the female in matters of
love is as apparent in the butterfly as in the man, and must have
been continuously favoured from the earliest stages of animal
evolution down to the present time. It is the factor in the great
theory of sexual selection that corresponds to the insistence and
directness of the male. Coyness and caprice have in consequence
become a heritage of the sex, together with a cohort of allied
weaknesses and petty deceits, that men have come to think venial and
even amiable in women, but which they would not tolerate among
themselves.

Various forms of natural character and temperament would no doubt be
found to occur in constant proportions among any large group of
persons of the same race, but what those proportions may be has
never yet been investigated. It is extremely difficult to estimate
it by observations of adults, owing to their habit of restraining
natural ill tendencies, and to their long-practised concealment of
those they do not restrain but desire to hide. The necessary
observations ought, however, to be easily made on young children in
schools, whose manifestations of character are conspicuous, who are
simultaneously for months and years under the eye of the same master
or mistress, and who are daily classed according to their various
merits. I have occasionally asked the opinion of persons well
qualified to form them, and who have had experience of teaching, as
to the most obvious divisions of character to be found among school
children. The replies have differed, but those on which most stress
was laid were connected with energy, sociability, desire to attract
notice, truthfulness, thoroughness, and refinement.

The varieties of the emotional constitution and of likings and
antipathies are very numerous and wide. I may give two instances
which I have not seen elsewhere alluded to, merely as examples of
variation. One of them was often brought to my notice at the time
when the public were admitted to see the snakes fed at the
Zoological Gardens. Rabbits, birds, and other small animals were
dropped in the different cages, which the snakes, after more or less
serpentine action, finally struck with their poison fangs or crushed
in their folds. I found it a horrible but a fascinating scene. We
lead for the most part such an easy and carpeted existence, screened
from the stern realities of life and death, that many of us are
impelled to draw aside the curtain now and then, and gaze for a
while behind it. This exhibition of the snakes at their feeding-time,
which gave to me, as it doubtless did to several others, a sense of
curdling of the blood, had no such effect on many of the visitors. I
have often seen people--nurses, for instance, and children of all
ages--looking unconcernedly and amusedly at the scene. Their
indifference was perhaps the most painful element of the whole
transaction. Their sympathies were absolutely unawakened. I quote
this instance, partly because it leads to another very curious fact
that I have noticed as regards the way with which different persons
and races regard snakes. I myself have a horror of them, and can
only by great self-control, and under a sense of real agitation,
force myself to touch one. A considerable proportion of the English
race would feel much as I do; but the remainder do not. I have
questioned numbers of persons of both sexes, and have been
astonished at the frequency with which I have been assured that they
had no shrinking whatever from the sight of the wriggling mysterious
reptile. Some persons, as is well known, make pets of them; moreover,
I am told that there is no passage in Greek or Latin authors
expressive of that form of horror which I myself feel, and which may
be compared to what is said to be felt by hydrophobic sufferers at
the undulating movements of water. There are numerous allusions in
the classics to the venom fang or the crushing power of snakes, but
not to an aversion inspired by its form and movement. It was the
Greek symbol of Hippocrates and of healing. There is nothing of the
kind in Hebrew literature, where the snake is figured as an
attractive tempter. In Hindu fables the cobra is the ingenious and
intelligent animal, corresponding to the fox in ours. Serpent worship
was very widely spread. I therefore doubt whether the antipathy to
the snake is very common among mankind, notwithstanding the
instinctive terror that their sight inspires in monkeys.

The other instance I may adduce is that of the horror of blood which
is curiously different in animals of the same species and in the
same animals at different times. I have had a good deal of
experience of the behaviour of oxen at the sight of blood, and found
it to be by no means uniform. In my South African travels I relied
chiefly on half-wild slaughter oxen to feed my large party, and
occasionally had to shoot one on every second day. Usually the rest
of the drove paid no particular heed to the place of blood, but at
other rare times they seemed maddened and performed a curious sort
of war-dance at the spot, making buck-leaps, brandishing their horns,
and goring at the ground. It was a grotesque proceeding, utterly
unlike the usual behaviour of cattle. I only witnessed it once
elsewhere, and that was in the Pyrenees, where I came on a herd that
was being driven homewards. Each cow in turn, as it passed a
particular spot, performed the well-remembered antics. I asked, and
learned that a cow had been killed there by a bear a few days
previously. The natural horror at blood, and it may be the
consequent dislike of red, is common among mankind; but I have seen
a well-dressed child of about four years old poking its finger with
a pleased innocent look into the bleeding carcase of a sheep hung up
in a butcher's shop, while its nurse was inside.

The subject of character deserves more statistical investigation
than it has yet received, and none have a better chance of doing it
well than schoolmasters; their opportunities are indeed most enviable.
It would be necessary to approach the subject wholly without
prejudice, as a pure matter of observation, just as if the children
were the fauna and flora of hitherto undescribed species in an
entirely new land.




CRIMINALS AND THE INSANE.

Criminality, though not very various in its development, is
extremely complex in its origin; nevertheless certain general
conclusions are arrived at by the best writers on the subject, among
whom Prosper Despine is one of the most instructive. The ideal
criminal has marked peculiarities of character: his conscience is
almost deficient, his instincts are vicious, his power of
self-control is very weak, and he usually detests continuous labour.
The absence of self-control is due to ungovernable temper, to passion,
or to mere imbecility, and the conditions that determine the
particular description of crime are the character of the instincts
and of the temptation.

The deficiency of conscience in criminals, as shown by the absence
of genuine remorse for their guilt, astonishes all who first become
familiar with the details of prison life. Scenes of heartrending
despair are hardly ever witnessed among prisoners; their sleep is
broken by no uneasy dreams--on the contrary, it is easy and sound;
they have also excellent appetites. But hypocrisy is a very common
vice; and all my information agrees as to the utter untruthfulness
of criminals, however plausible their statements may be.

We must guard ourselves against looking upon vicious instincts as
perversions, inasmuch as they may be strictly in accordance with the
healthy nature of the man, and, being transmissible by inheritance,
may become the normal characteristics of a healthy race, just as the
sheep-dog, the retriever, the pointer, and the bull-dog, have their
several instincts. There can be no greater popular error than the
supposition that natural instinct is a perfectly trustworthy guide,
for there are striking contradictions to such an opinion in
individuals of every description of animal. The most that we are
entitled to say in any case is, that the prevalent instincts of each
race are trustworthy, not those of every individual. But even this
is saying too much, because when the conditions under which the race
is living have recently been changed, some instincts which were
adapted to the old state of things are sure to be fallacious guides
to conduct in the new one. A man who is counted as an atrocious
criminal in England, and is punished as such by English law in social
self-defence, may nevertheless have acted in strict accordance with
instincts that are laudable in less civilised societies. The ideal
criminal is, unhappily for him, deficient in qualities that are
capable of restraining his unkindly or inconvenient instincts; he
has neither sympathy for others nor the sense of duty, both of which
lie at the base of conscience; nor has he sufficient self-control to
accommodate himself to the society in which he has to live, and so to
promote his own selfish interests in the long-run. He cannot be
preserved from criminal misadventure, either by altruistic
sentiments or by intelligently egoistic ones.

The perpetuation of the criminal class by heredity is a question
difficult to grapple with on many accounts. Their vagrant habits,
their illegitimate unions, and extreme untruthfulness, are among the
difficulties of the investigation. It is, however, easy to show that
the criminal nature tends to be inherited; while, on the other hand,
it is impossible that women who spend a large portion of the best
years of their life in prison can contribute many children to the
population. The true state of the case appears to be that the
criminal population receives steady accessions from those who,
without having strongly-marked criminal natures, do nevertheless
belong to a type of humanity that is exceedingly ill suited to play
a respectable part in our modern civilisation, though it is well
suited to flourish under half-savage conditions, being naturally
both healthy and prolific. These persons are apt to go to the bad;
their daughters consort with criminals and become the parents of
criminals. An extraordinary example of this is afforded by the
history of the infamous Jukes family in America, whose pedigree has
been made out, with extraordinary care, during no less than seven
generations, and is the subject of an elaborate memoir printed in
the Thirty-first Annual Report of the Prison Association of New York,
1876. It includes no less than 540 individuals of Jukes blood, of
whom a frightful number degraded into criminality, pauperism, or
disease.

It is difficult to summarise the results in a few plain figures, but
I will state those respecting the fifth generation, through the
eldest of the five prolific daughters of the man who is the common
ancestor of the race. The total number of these was 123, of whom
thirty-eight came through an illegitimate granddaughter, and
eighty-five through legitimate grandchildren. Out of the thirty-eight,
sixteen have been in jail, six of them for heinous offences, one of
these having been committed no less than nine times; eleven others
led openly disreputable lives or were paupers; four were notoriously
intemperate; the history of three had not been traced, and only four
are known to have done well. The great majority of the women
consorted with criminals. As to the eighty-five legitimate
descendants, they were less flagrantly bad, for only five of them
had been in jail, and only thirteen others had been paupers. Now the
ancestor of all this mischief, who was born about the year 1730, is
described as having been a jolly companionable man, a hunter, and a
fisher, averse to steady labour, but working hard and idling by turns,
and who had numerous illegitimate children, whose issue has not been
traced. He was, in fact, a somewhat good specimen of a half-savage,
without any seriously criminal instincts. The girls were apparently
attractive, marrying early and sometimes not badly; but the
gipsy-like character of the race was unsuited to success in a
civilised country. So the descendants went to the bad, and such
hereditary moral weaknesses as they may have had, rose to the
surface and worked their mischief without check. Cohabiting with
criminals, and being extremely prolific, the result was the
production of a stock exceeding 500 in number, of a prevalent
criminal type. Through disease and intemperance the breed is now
rapidly diminishing; the infant mortality has of late been horrible,
but fortunately the women of the present generation bear usually but
few children, and many of them are altogether childless.

The criminal classes contain a considerable portion of epileptics
and other persons of instable, emotional temperament, subject to
nervous explosions that burst out at intervals and relieve the system.
The mad outbreaks of women in convict prisons is a most curious
phenomenon. Some of them are apt from time to time to have a
gradually increasing desire that at last becomes irresistible, to
"break out," as it is technically called; that is, to smash and tear
everything they can within reach, and to shriek, curse, and howl. At
length the fit expends itself; the devil, as it were, leaves them,
and they begin to behave again in their ordinary way. The highest
form of emotional instability exists in confirmed epilepsy, where
its manifestations have often been studied; it is found in a high
but somewhat less extraordinary degree in the hysterical and allied
affections. In the confirmed epileptic constitution the signs of
general instability of nervous action are muscular convulsions,
irregularities of bodily temperature, mobile intellectual activity,
and extraordinary oscillations between opposed emotional states. I
am assured by excellent authority that instable manifestations of
extreme piety and of extreme vice are almost invariably shown by
epileptics, and should be regarded as a prominent feature of their
peculiar constitution. These unfortunate beings see no incongruity
between the pious phrases that they pour out at one moment and their
vile and obscene language in the next; neither do they show
repentance for past misconduct when they are convicted of crimes,
however abominable these may be. They are creatures of the moment,
possessing no inhibitory check upon their desires and emotions, which
drive them headlong hither and thither.

Madness is often associated with epilepsy; in all cases it is a
frightful and hereditary disfigurement of humanity, which appears,
from the upshot of various conflicting accounts, to be on the
increase. The neurotic constitution from which it springs is however
not without its merits, as has been well pointed out, since a large
proportion of the enthusiastic men and women to whose labour the
world is largely indebted, have had that constitution, judging from
the fact that insanity existed in their families.

The phases of extreme piety and extreme vice which so rapidly
succeed one another in the same individual among the epileptics, are
more widely separated among those who are simply insane. It has been
noticed that among the morbid organic conditions which accompany the
show of excessive piety and religious rapture in the insane, none are
so frequent as disorders of the sexual organisation. Conversely, the
frenzies of religious revivals have not unfrequently ended in gross
profligacy. The encouragement of celibacy by the fervent leaders of
most creeds, utilises in an unconscious way the morbid connection
between an over-restraint of the sexual desires and impulses towards
extreme devotion.

Another remarkable phase among the insane consists in strange views
about their individuality. They think that their body is made of
glass, or that their brains have literally disappeared, or that
there are different persons inside them, or that they are somebody
else, and so forth. It is said that this phase is most commonly
associated with morbid disturbance of the alimentary organs. So in
many religions fasting has been used as an agent for detaching the
thoughts from the body and for inducing ecstasy.

There is yet a third peculiarity of the insane which is almost
universal, that of gloomy segregation. Passengers nearing London by
the Great Western Railway must have frequently remarked the unusual
appearance of the crowd of lunatics when taking their exercise in
the large green enclosure in front of Hanwell Asylum. They almost
without exception walk apart in moody isolation, each in his own way,
buried in his own thoughts. It is a scene like that fabled in
Vathek's hall of Eblis. I am assured that whenever two are seen in
company, it is either because their attacks of madness are of an
intermittent and epileptic character and they are temporarily sane,
or otherwise that they are near recovery. Conversely, the curative
influence of social habits is fully recognised, and they are promoted
by festivities in the asylums. On the other hand, the great teachers
of all creeds have made seclusion a prominent religious exercise. In
short, by enforcing celibacy, fasting, and solitude, they have done
their best towards making men mad, and they have always largely
succeeded in inducing morbid mental conditions among their followers.

Floods of light are thrown upon various incidents of devotee life,
and also upon the disgusting and not otherwise intelligible
character of the sanctimonious scoundrel, by the everyday
experiences of the madhouse. No professor of metaphysics, psychology,
or religion can claim to know the elements of what he teaches,
unless he is acquainted with the ordinary phenomena of idiocy,
madness, and epilepsy. He must study the manifestations of disease
and congenital folly, as well as those of sanity and high intellect.




GREGARIOUS AND SLAVISH INSTINCTS.

I propose in this chapter to discuss a curious and apparently
anomalous group of base moral instincts and intellectual deficiencies,
that are innate rather than acquired, by tracing their analogies in
the world of brutes and examining the conditions through which they
have been evolved. They are the slavish aptitudes from which the
leaders of men are exempt, but which are characteristic elements in
the disposition of ordinary persons. The vast majority of persons of
our race have a natural tendency to shrink from the responsibility
of standing and acting alone; they exalt the _vox populi_, even when
they know it to be the utterance of a mob of nobodies, into the
_vox Dei_, and they are willing slaves to tradition, authority,
and custom. The intellectual deficiencies corresponding to these
moral flaws are shown by the rareness of free and original thought as
compared with the frequency and readiness with which men accept the
opinions of those in authority as binding on their judgment. I shall
endeavour to prove that the slavish aptitudes in man are a direct
consequence of his gregarious nature, which itself is a result of
the conditions both of his primeval barbarism and of the forms of
his subsequent civilisation. My argument will be, that gregarious
brute animals possess a want of self-reliance in a marked degree;
that the conditions of the lives of these animals have made a want
of self-reliance a necessity to them, and that by the law of natural
selection the gregarious instincts and their accompanying slavish
aptitudes have gradually become evolved. Then I shall argue that our
remote ancestors have lived under parallel conditions, and that
other causes peculiar to human society have acted up to the present
day in the same direction, and that we have inherited the gregarious
instincts and slavish aptitudes which have been needed under past
circumstances, although in our advancing civilisation they are
becoming of more harm than good to our race.

It was my fortune, in earlier life, to gain an intimate knowledge of
certain classes of gregarious animals. The urgent need of the camel
for the close companionship of his fellows was a never-exhausted
topic of curious admiration to me during tedious days of travel
across many North African deserts. I also happened to hear and read
a great deal about the still more marked gregarious instincts of the
llama; but the social animal into whose psychology I am conscious of
having penetrated most thoroughly is the ox of the wild parts of
western South Africa. It is necessary to insist upon the epithet
"wild," because an ox of tamed parentage has different natural
instincts; for instance, an English ox is far less gregarious than
those I am about to describe, and affords a proportionately less
valuable illustration to my argument. The oxen of which I speak
belonged to the Damaras, and none of the ancestry of these cattle
had ever been broken to harness. They were watched from a distance
during the day, as they roamed about the open country, and at night
they were driven with cries to enclosures, into which they rushed
much like a body of terrified wild animals driven by huntsmen into a
trap. Their scared temper was such as to make it impossible to lay
hold of them by other means than by driving the whole herd into a
clump, and lassoing the leg of the animal it was desired to seize,
and throwing him to the ground with dexterous force. With oxen and
cows of this description, whose nature is no doubt shared by the
bulls, I spent more than a year in the closest companionship.

I had nearly a hundred of the beasts broken in for the waggon, for
packs, and for the saddle. I travelled an entire journey of
exploration on the back of one of them, with others by my side,
either labouring at their tasks or walking at leisure; and with
others again who were wholly unbroken, and who served the purpose of
an itinerant larder. At night, when there had been no time to erect
an enclosure to hold them, I lay down in their midst, and it was
interesting to observe how readily they then availed themselves of
the neighbourhood of the camp fire and of man, conscious of the
protection they afforded from prowling carnivora, whose cries and
roars, now distant, now near, continually broke upon the stillness.
These opportunities of studying the disposition of such peculiar
cattle were not wasted upon me. I had only too much leisure to think
about them, and the habits of the animals strongly attracted my
curiosity. The better I understood them, the more complex and worthy
of study did their minds appear to be. But I am now concerned only
with their blind gregarious instincts, which are conspicuously
distinct from the ordinary social desires. In the latter they are
deficient; thus they are not amiable to one another, but show on the
whole more expressions of spite and disgust than of forbearance or
fondness. They do not suffer from an ennui, which society can remove,
because their coarse feeding and their ruminant habits make them
somewhat stolid. Neither can they love society, as monkeys do, for
the opportunities it affords of a fuller and more varied life,
because they remain self-absorbed in the middle of their herd, while
the monkeys revel together in frolics, scrambles, fights, loves, and
chatterings. Yet although the ox has so little affection for, or
individual interest in, his fellows, he cannot endure even a
momentary severance from his herd. If he be separated from it by
stratagem or force, he exhibits every sign of mental agony; he
strives with all his might to get back again, and when he succeeds,
he plunges into its middle to bathe his whole body with the comfort
of closest companionship. This passionate terror at segregation is a
convenience to the herdsman, who may rest assured in the darkness or
in the mist that the whole herd is safe whenever he can get a
glimpse of a single ox. It is also the cause of great inconvenience
to the traveller in ox-waggons, who constantly feels himself in a
position towards his oxen like that of a host to a company of
bashful gentlemen at the time when he is trying to get them to move
from the drawing-room to the dinner-table, and no one will go first,
but every one backs and gives place to his neighbour. The traveller
finds great difficulty in procuring animals capable of acting the
part of fore-oxen to his team, the ordinary members of the wild herd
being wholly unfitted by nature to move in so prominent and isolated
a position, even though, as is the custom, a boy is always in front
to persuade or pull them onwards. Therefore, a good fore-ox is an
animal of an exceptionally independent disposition. Men who break in
wild cattle for harness watch assiduously for those who show a
self-reliant nature, by grazing apart or ahead of the rest, and
these they break in for fore-oxen. The other cattle may be
indifferently devoted to ordinary harness purposes, or to slaughter;
but the born leaders are far too rare to be used for any less
distinguished service than that which they alone are capable of
fulfilling. But a still more exceptional degree of merit may
sometimes be met with among the many thousands of Damara cattle. It
is possible to find an ox who may be ridden, not indeed as freely as
a horse, for I have never heard of a feat like that, but at all
events wholly apart from the companionship of others; and an
accomplished rider will even succeed in urging him out at a trot
from the very middle of his fellows. With respect to the negative
side of the scale, though I do not recollect definite instances, I
can recall general impressions of oxen showing a deficiency from the
average ox standard of self-reliance, about equal to the excess of
that quality found in ordinary fore-oxen. Thus I recollect there
were some cattle of a peculiarly centripetal instinct, who ran more
madly than the rest into the middle of the herd when they were
frightened; and I have no reason to doubt from general recollections
that the law of deviation from an average would be as applicable to
independence of character among cattle as one might expect it
theoretically to be. The conclusion to which we are driven is, that
few of the Damara cattle have enough originality and independence of
disposition to pass unaided through their daily risks in a tolerably
comfortable manner. They are essentially slavish, and seek no better
lot than to be led by any one of their number who has enough
self-reliance to accept that position. No ox ever dares to act
contrary to the rest of the herd, but he accepts their common
determination as an authority binding on his conscience.

An incapacity of relying on oneself and a faith in others are
precisely the conditions that compel brutes to congregate and live
in herds; and, again, it is essential to their safety in a country
infested by large carnivora, that they should keep closely together
in herds. No ox grazing alone could live for many days unless he
were protected, far more assiduously and closely than is possible to
barbarians. The Damara owners confide perhaps 200 cattle to a couple
of half-starved youths, who pass their time in dozing or in grubbing
up roots to eat. The owners know that it is hopeless to protect the
herd from lions, so they leave it to take its chance; and as regards
human marauders they equally know that the largest number of cattle
watchers they could spare could make no adequate resistance to an
attack; they therefore do not send more than two, who are enough to
run home and give the alarm to the whole male population of the
tribe to run in arms on the tracks of their plundered property.
Consequently, as I began by saying, the cattle have to take care of
themselves against the wild beasts, and they would infallibly be
destroyed by them if they had not safeguards of their own, which are
not easily to be appreciated at first sight at their full value. We
shall understand them better by considering the precise nature of
the danger that an ox runs. When he is alone it is not simply that he
is too defenceless, but that he is easily surprised. A crouching
lion fears cattle who turn boldly upon him, and he does so with
reason. The horns of an ox or antelope are able to make an ugly
wound in the paw or chest of a springing beast when he receives its
thrust in the same way that an over-eager pugilist meets his
adversary's "counter" hit. Hence it is that a cow who has calved by
the wayside, and has been temporarily abandoned by the caravan, is
never seized by lions. The incident frequently occurs, and as
frequently are the cow and calf eventually brought safe to the camp;
and yet there is usually evidence in footprints of her having
sustained a regular siege from the wild beasts; but she is so
restless and eager for the safety of her young that no beast of prey
can approach her unawares. This state of exaltation is of course
exceptional; cattle are obliged in their ordinary course of life to
spend a considerable part of the day with their heads buried in the
grass, where they can neither see nor smell what is about them. A
still larger part of their time must be spent in placid rumination,
during which they cannot possibly be on the alert. But a herd of
such animals, when considered as a whole, is always on the alert; at
almost every moment some eyes, ears, and noses will command all
approaches, and the start or cry of alarm of a single beast is a
signal to all his companions. To live gregariously is to become a
fibre in a vast sentient web overspreading many acres; it is to
become the possessor of faculties always awake, of eyes that see in
all directions, of ears and nostrils that explore a broad belt of air;
it is also to become the occupier of every bit of vantage ground
whence the approach of a wild beast might be overlooked. The
protective senses of each individual who chooses to live in
companionship are multiplied by a large factor, and he thereby
receives a maximum of security at a minimum cost of restlessness.
When we isolate an animal who has been accustomed to a gregarious
life, we take away his sense of protection, for he feels himself
exposed to danger from every part of the circle around him, except
the one point on which his attention is momentarily fixed; and he
knows that disaster may easily creep up to him from behind.
Consequently his glance is restless and anxious, and is turned in
succession to different quarters; his movements are hurried and
agitated, and he becomes a prey to the extremest terror. There can
be no room for doubt that it is suitable to the well-being of cattle
in a country infested with beasts of prey to live in close
companionship, and being suitable, it follows from the law of
natural selection that the development of gregarious and therefore
of slavish instincts must be favoured in such cattle. It also
follows from the same law that the degree in which those instincts
are developed is on the whole the most conducive to their safety. If
they were more gregarious they would crowd so closely as to
interfere with each other when grazing the scattered pasture of
Damara land; if less gregarious, they would be too widely scattered
to keep a sufficient watch against the wild beasts.

I now proceed to consider more particularly why the range of
deviation from the average is such that we find about one ox out of
fifty to possess sufficient independence of character to serve as a
pretty good fore-ox. Why is it not one in five or one in five hundred?
The reason undoubtedly is that natural selection tends to give but
one leader to each suitably-sized herd, and to repress superabundant
leaders. There is a certain size of herd most suitable to the
geographical and other conditions of the country; it must not
be too large, or the scattered puddles which form their only
watering-places for a great part of the year would not suffice; and
there are similar drawbacks in respect to pasture. It must not be
too small, or it would be comparatively insecure; thus a troop of
five animals is far more easy to be approached by a stalking
huntsman than one of twenty, and the latter than one of a hundred. We
have seen that it is the oxen who graze apart, as well as those who
lead the herd, who are recognised by the trainers of cattle as
gifted with enough independence of character to become fore-oxen.
They are even preferred to the actual leaders of the herd; they dare
to move more alone, and therefore their independence is undoubted.
The leaders are safe enough from lions, because their flanks and rear
are guarded by their followers; but each of those who graze apart,
and who represent the superabundant supply of self-reliant animals,
have one flank and the rear exposed, and it is precisely these whom
the lions take. Looking at the matter in a broad way, we may justly
assert that wild beasts trim and prune every herd into compactness,
and tend to reduce it into a closely-united body with a single
well-protected leader. That the development of independence of
character in cattle is thus suppressed below its otherwise natural
standard by the influence of wild beasts, is shown by the greater
display of self-reliance among cattle whose ancestry for some
generations have not been exposed to such danger.

What has been said about cattle, in relation to wild beasts, applies
with more or less obvious modifications to barbarians in relation to
their neighbours, but I insist on a close resemblance in the
particular circumstance, that many savages are so unamiable and
morose as to have hardly any object in associating together, besides
that of mutual support. If we look at the inhabitants of the very
same country as the oxen I have described, we shall find them
congregated into multitudes of tribes, all more or less at war with
one another. We shall find that few of these tribes are very small,
and few very large, and that it is precisely those that are
exceptionally large or small whose condition is the least stable. A
very small tribe is sure to be overthrown, slaughtered, or driven
into slavery by its more powerful neighbour. A very large tribe
falls to pieces through its own unwieldiness, because, by the nature
of things, it must be either deficient in centralisation or
straitened in food, or both. A barbarian population is obliged to
live dispersedly, since a square mile of land will support only a
few hunters or shepherds; on the other hand, a barbarian government
cannot be long maintained unless the chief is brought into frequent
contact with his dependants, and this is geographically impossible
when his tribe is so scattered as to cover a great extent of
territory. The law of selection must discourage every race of
barbarians which supplies self-reliant individuals in such large
numbers as to cause tribes of moderate size to lose their blind
desire of aggregation. It must equally discourage a breed that is
incompetent to supply such men in sufficiently abundant ratio to the
rest of the population to ensure the existence of tribes of not too
large a size. It must not be supposed that gregarious instincts are
equally important to all forms of savage life; but I hold, from what
we know of the clannish fighting habits of our forefathers, that
they were every whit as applicable to the earlier ancestors of our
European stock as they are still to a large part of the black
population of Africa.

There is, moreover, an extraordinary power of tyranny invested in
the chiefs of tribes and nations of men, that so vastly outweighs
the analogous power possessed by the leaders of animal herds as to
rank as a special attribute of human society, eminently conducive to
slavishness. If any brute in a herd makes itself obnoxious to the
leader, the leader attacks him, and there is a free fight between the
two, the other animals looking on the while. But if a man makes
himself obnoxious to his chief, he is attacked, not by the chief
single-handed, but by the overpowering force of his executive. The
rebellious individual has to brave a disciplined host; there are
spies who will report his doings, a local authority who will send a
detachment of soldiers to drag him to trial; there are prisons ready
built to hold him, civil authorities wielding legal powers of
stripping him of all his possessions, and official executioners
prepared to torture or kill him. The tyrannies under which men have
lived, whether under rude barbarian chiefs, under the great
despotisms of half-civilised Oriental countries, or under some of
the more polished but little less severe governments of modern days,
must have had a frightful influence in eliminating independence of
character from the human race. Think of Austria, of Naples, and even
of France under Napoleon III. It was stated[1] in 1870 that,
according to papers found at the Tuileries, 26,642 persons had been
arrested in France for political offences since 2nd December, 1851,
and that 14,118 had been transported, exiled, or detained in prison.

I have already spoken in _Hereditary Genius_ of the large effects of
religious persecution in comparatively recent years, on the natural
character of races, and shall not say more about it here; but it
must not be omitted from the list of steady influences continuing
through ancient historical times down, in some degree, to the
present day, in destroying the self-reliant, and therefore the
nobler races of men.

I hold that the blind instincts evolved under these long-continued
conditions have been ingrained into our breed, and that they are a
bar to our enjoying the freedom which the forms of modern
civilisation are otherwise capable of giving us. A really
intelligent nation might be held together by far stronger forces
than are derived from the purely gregarious instincts. A nation need
not be a mob of slaves, clinging to one another through fear, and
for the most part incapable of self-government, and begging to be led;
but it might consist of vigorous self-reliant men, knit to one
[6] another by innumerable ties, into a strong, tense, and elastic
organisation.

[Footnote 6: _Daily News_, 17th October, 1870.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The character of the corporate action of a nation in which each man
judges for himself, might be expected to possess statistical
constancy. It would be the expression of the dominant character of a
large number of separate members of the same race, and ought
therefore to be remarkably uniform. Fickleness of national character
is principally due to the several members of the nation exercising
no independent judgment, but allowing themselves to be led hither and
thither by the successive journalists, orators, and sentimentalists
who happen for the time to have the chance of directing them.

Our present natural dispositions make it impossible for us to attain
the ideal standard of a nation of men all judging soberly for
themselves, and therefore the slavishness of the mass of our
countrymen, in morals and intellect, must be an admitted fact in all
schemes of regenerative policy.

The hereditary taint due to the primeval barbarism of our race, and
maintained by later influences, will have to be bred out of it
before our descendants can rise to the position of free members of
an intelligent society: and I may add that the most likely nest at
the present time for self-reliant natures is to be found in States
founded and maintained by emigrants.

Servility has its romantic side, in the utter devotion of a slave to
the lightest wishes and the smallest comforts of his master, and in
that of a loyal subject to those of his sovereign; but such devotion
cannot be called a reasonable self-sacrifice; it is rather an
abnegation of the trust imposed on man to use his best judgment, and
to act in the way he thinks the wisest. Trust in authority is a
trait of the character of children, of weakly women, and of the sick
and infirm, but it is out of place among members of a thriving
resolute community during the fifty or more years of their middle
life. Those who have been born in a free country feel the atmosphere
of a paternal government very oppressive. The hearty and earnest
political and individual life which is found when every man has a
continual sense of public responsibility, and knows that success
depends on his own right judgment and exertion, is replaced under a
despotism by an indolent reliance upon what its master may direct,
and by a demoralising conviction that personal advancement is best
secured by solicitations and favour.




INTELLECTUAL DIFFERENCES.

It is needless for me to speak here about the differences in
intellectual power between different men and different races, or
about the convertibility of genius as shown by different members of
the same gifted family achieving eminence in varied ways, as I have
already written at length on these subjects in _Hereditary Genius_
and in _Antecedents of English Men of Science_. It is, however, well
to remark that during the fourteen years that have elapsed since the
former book was published, numerous fresh instances have arisen of
distinction being attained by members of the gifted families whom I
quoted as instances of heredity, thus strengthening my arguments.




MENTAL IMAGERY.

Anecdotes find their way into print, from time to time, of persons
whose visual memory is so clear and sharp as to present mental
pictures that may be scrutinised with nearly as much ease and
prolonged attention as if they were real objects. I became
interested in the subject and made a rather extensive inquiry into
the mode of visual presentation in different persons, so far as
could be gathered from their respective statements. It seemed to me
that the results might illustrate the essential differences between
the mental operations of different men, that they might give some
clue to the origin of visions, and that the course of the inquiry
might reveal some previously unnoticed facts. It has done all this
more or less, and I will explain the results in the present and in
the three following chapters.

It is not necessary to trouble the reader with my earlier tentative
steps to find out what I desired to learn. After the inquiry had
been fairly started it took the form of submitting a certain number
of printed questions to a large number of persons (see Appendix E).
There is hardly any more difficult task than that of framing
questions which are not likely to be misunderstood, which admit of
easy reply, and which cover the ground of inquiry. I did my best in
these respects, without forgetting the most important part of
all--namely, to tempt my correspondents to write freely in fuller
explanation of their replies, and on cognate topics as well. These
separate letters have proved more instructive and interesting by far
than the replies to the set questions.

The first group of the rather long series of queries related to the
illumination, definition, and colouring of the mental image, and
were framed thus:--

"Before addressing yourself to any of the Questions on the
opposite page, think of some definite object--suppose it is
your breakfast-table as you sat down to it this morning--and
consider carefully the picture that rises before your mind's eye."

1. _Illumination_.--Is the image dim or fairly clear? Is its
brightness comparable to that of the actual scene?

2. _Definition_.--Are all the objects pretty well defined at the
same time, or is the place of sharpest definition at any one moment
more contracted than it is in a real scene?

3. _Colouring_.--Are the colours of the china, of the toast,
bread-crust, mustard, meat, parsley, or whatever may have been on
the table, quite distinct and natural?

The earliest results of my inquiry amazed me. I had begun by
questioning friends in the scientific world, as they were the most
likely class of men to give accurate answers concerning this faculty
of visualising, to which novelists and poets continually allude,
which has left an abiding mark on the vocabularies of every language,
and which supplies the material out of which dreams and the
well-known hallucinations of sick people are built.

To my astonishment, I found that the great majority of the men of
science to whom I first applied protested that mental imagery was
unknown to them, and they looked on me as fanciful and fantastic in
supposing that the words "mental imagery" really expressed what I
believed everybody supposed them to mean. They had no more notion of
its true nature than a colour-blind man, who has not discerned his
defect, has of the nature of colour. They had a mental deficiency of
which they were unaware, and naturally enough supposed that those
who affirmed they possessed it, were romancing. To illustrate their
mental attitude it will be sufficient to quote a few lines from the
letter of one of my correspondents, who writes:--

"These questions presuppose assent to some sort of a proposition
regarding the 'mind's eye,' and the 'images' which it sees.... This
points to some initial fallacy.... It is only by a figure of speech
that I can describe my recollection of a scene as a 'mental image'
which I can 'see' with my 'mind's eye.' ... I do not see it ... any
more than a man sees the thousand lines of Sophocles which under due
pressure he is ready to repeat. The memory possesses it, etc."

Much the same result followed inquiries made for me by a friend
among members of the French Institute.

On the other hand, when I spoke to persons whom I met in general
society, I found an entirely different disposition to prevail. Many
men and a yet larger number of women, and many boys and girls,
declared that they habitually saw mental imagery, and that it was
perfectly distinct to them and full of colour. The more I pressed
and cross-questioned them, professing myself to be incredulous, the
more obvious was the truth of their first assertions. They described
their imagery in minute detail, and they spoke in a tone of surprise
at my apparent hesitation in accepting what they said. I felt that I
myself should have spoken exactly as they did if I had been
describing a scene that lay before my eyes, in broad daylight, to a
blind man who persisted in doubting the reality of vision. Reassured
by this happier experience, I recommenced to inquire among
scientific men, and soon found scattered instances of what I sought,
though in by no means the same abundance as elsewhere. I then
circulated my questions more generally among my friends and through
their hands, and obtained the replies that are the main subject of
this and of the three next chapters. They were from persons of both
sexes, and of various ages, and in the end from occasional
correspondents in nearly every civilised country.

I have also received batches of answers from various educational
establishments both in England and America, which were made after
the masters had fully explained the meaning of the questions, and
interested the boys in them. These have the merit of returns derived
from a general census, which my other data lack, because I cannot
for a moment suppose that the writers of the latter are a haphazard
proportion of those to whom they were sent. Indeed I know of some who,
disavowing all possession of the power, and of many others who,
possessing it in too faint a degree to enable them to express what
their experiences really were, in a manner satisfactory to themselves,
sent no returns at all. Considerable statistical similarity was,
however, observed between the sets of returns furnished by the
schoolboys and those sent by my separate correspondents, and I may
add that they accord in this respect with the oral information I
have elsewhere obtained. The conformity of replies from so many
different sources which was clear from the first, the fact of their
apparent trustworthiness being on the whole much increased by
cross-examination (though I could give one or two amusing instances
of break-down), and the evident effort made to give accurate answers,
have convinced me that it is a much easier matter than I had
anticipated to obtain trustworthy replies to psychological questions.
Many persons, especially women and intelligent children, take
pleasure in introspection, and strive their very best to explain
their mental processes. I think that a delight in self-dissection
must be a strong ingredient in the pleasure that many are said to
take in confessing themselves to priests.

Here, then, are two rather notable results: the one is the proved
facility of obtaining statistical insight into the processes of
other persons' minds, whatever _a priori_ objection may have been
made as to its possibility; and the other is that scientific men, as
a class, have feeble powers of visual representation. There is no
doubt whatever on the latter point, however it may be accounted for.
My own conclusion is, that an over-ready perception of sharp mental
pictures is antagonistic to the acquirement of habits of
highly-generalised and abstract thought, especially when the steps
of reasoning are carried on by words as symbols, and that if the
faculty of seeing the pictures was ever possessed by men who think
hard, it is very apt to be lost by disuse. The highest minds are
probably those in which it is not lost, but subordinated, and is
ready for use on suitable occasions. I am, however, bound to say,
that the missing faculty seems to be replaced so serviceably by other
modes of conception, chiefly, I believe, connected with the
incipient motor sense, not of the eyeballs only but of the muscles
generally, that men who declare themselves entirely deficient in the
power of seeing mental pictures can nevertheless give life-like
descriptions of what they have seen, and can otherwise express
themselves as if they were gifted with a vivid visual imagination.
They can also become painters of the rank of Royal Academicians.

The facts I am now about to relate are obtained from the returns of
100 adult men, of whom 19 are Fellows of the Royal Society, mostly
of very high repute, and at least twice, and I think I may say three
times, as many more are persons of distinction in various kinds of
intellectual work. As already remarked, these returns taken by
themselves do not profess to be of service in a general statistical
sense, but they are of much importance in showing how men of
exceptional accuracy express themselves when they are speaking of
mental imagery. They also testify to the variety of experiences to
be met with in a moderately large circle. I will begin by giving a
few cases of the highest, of the medium, and of the lowest order of
the faculty of visualising. The hundred returns were first
classified according to the order of the faculty, as judged to the
best of my ability from the whole of what was said in them, and of
what I knew from other sources of the writers; and the number
prefixed to each quotation shows its place in the class-list.


VIVIDNESS OF MENTAL IMAGERY.

(From returns, furnished by 100 men, at least half of whom are
distinguished in science or in other fields of intellectual work.)

_Cases where the faculty is very high_.

1. Brilliant, distinct, never blotchy.

2. Quite comparable to the real object. I feel as though I was
dazzled, _e.g._ when recalling the sun to my mental vision.

3. In some instances quite as bright as an actual scene.

4. Brightness as in the actual scene.

5. Thinking of the breakfast-table this morning, all the objects in
my mental picture are as bright as the actual scene.

6. The image once seen is perfectly clear and bright.

7. Brightness at first quite comparable to actual scene.

8. The mental image appears to correspond in all respects with
reality. I think it is as clear as the actual scene.

9. The brightness is perfectly comparable to that of the real scene.

10. I think the illumination of the imaginary image is nearly equal
to that of the real one.

11. All clear and bright; all the objects seem to me well defined at
the same time.

12. I can see my breakfast-table or any equally familiar thing with
my mind's eye, quite as well in all particulars as I can do if the
reality is before me.

_Cases where the faculty is mediocre_.

46. Fairly clear and not incomparable in illumination with that of
the real scene, especially when I first catch it. Apt to become
fainter when more particularly attended to.

47. Fairly clear, not quite comparable to that of the actual scene.
Some objects are more sharply defined than others, the more familiar
objects coming more distinctly in my mind.

48. Fairly clear as a general image; details rather misty.

49. Fairly clear, but not equal to the scene. Defined, but not
sharply; not all seen with equal clearness.

50. Fairly clear. Brightness probably at least one-half to
two-thirds of original. [The writer is a physiologist.] Definition
varies very much, one or two objects being much more distinct than
the others, but the latter come out clearly if attention be paid to
them.

51. Image of my breakfast-table fairly clear, but not quite so
bright as the reality. Altogether it is pretty well defined; the
part where I sit and its surroundings are pretty well so.

52. Fairly clear, but brightness not comparable to that of the
actual scene. The objects are sharply defined; some of them are
salient, and others insignificant and dim, but by separate efforts I
can take a visualised inventory of the whole table.

53. Details of breakfast-table _when the scene is reflected on_ are
fairly defined and complete, but I have had a familiarity of many
years with my own breakfast-table, and the above would not be the
case with a table seen casually unless there were some striking
peculiarity in it,

54. I can recall any single object or group of objects, but not the
whole table at once. The things recalled are generally clearly
defined. Our table is a long one; I can in my mind pass my eyes all
down the table and see the different things distinctly, but not the
whole table at once.

_Cases where the faculty is at the lowest_.

89. Dim and indistinct, yet I can give an account of this morning's
breakfast-table; split herrings, broiled chickens, bacon, rolls,
rather light-coloured marmalade, faint green plates with stiff pink
flowers, the girls' dresses, etc. etc. I can also tell where all the
dishes were, and where the people sat (I was on a visit). But my
imagination is seldom pictorial except between sleeping and waking,
when I sometimes see rather vivid forms.

90. Dim and not comparable in brightness to the real scene. Badly
defined with blotches of light; very incomplete.

91. Dim, poor definition; could not sketch from it. I have a
difficulty in seeing two images together.

92. Usually very dim. I cannot speak of its brightness, but only of
its faintness. Not well defined and very incomplete.

93. Dim, imperfect.

94. I am very rarely able to recall any object whatever with any
sort of distinctness. Very occasionally an object or image will
recall itself, but even then it is more like a generalised image
than an individual image. I seem to be almost destitute of
visualising power, as under control.

95. No power of visualising. Between sleeping and waking, in illness
and in health, with eyes closed, some remarkable scenes have
occasionally presented themselves, but I cannot recall them when
awake with eyes open, and by daylight, or under any circumstances
whatever when a copy could be made of them on paper. I have drawn
both men and places many days or weeks after seeing them, but it was
by an effort of memory acting on study at the time, and assisted by
trial and error on the paper or canvas, whether in black, yellow, or
colour, afterwards.

96. It is only as a figure of speech that I can describe my
recollection of a scene as a "mental image" which I can "see" with
my "mind's eye." ... The memory possesses it, and the mind can at
will roam over the whole, or study minutely any part.

97. No individual objects, only a general idea of a very uncertain
kind.

98. No. My memory is not of the nature of a spontaneous vision,
though I remember well where a word occurs in a page, how furniture
looks in a room, etc. The ideas not felt to be mental pictures, but
rather the symbols of facts.


99. Extremely dim. The impressions are in all respects so dim, vague,
and transient, that I doubt whether they can reasonably be called
images. They are incomparably less than those of dreams.

100. My powers are zero. To my consciousness there is almost no
association of memory with objective visual impressions. I recollect
the breakfast-table, but do not see it.

These quotations clearly show the great variety of natural powers of
visual representation, and though the returns from which they are
taken have, as I said, no claim to be those of 100 Englishmen taken
at haphazard, nevertheless, to the best of my judgment, they happen
to differ among themselves in much the same way that such returns
would have done. I cannot procure a strictly haphazard series for
comparison, because in any group of persons whom I may question
there are always many too indolent to reply, or incapable of
expressing themselves, or who from some fancy of their own are
unwilling to reply. Still, as already mentioned, I have got together
several groups that approximate to what is wanted, usually from
schools, and I have analysed them as well as I could, and the general
result is that the above returns may be accepted as a fair
representation of the visualising powers of Englishmen. Treating
these according to the method described in the chapter of statistics,
we have the following results, in which, as a matter of interest, I
have also recorded the highest and the lowest of the series:--

_Highest_.--Brilliant, distinct, never blotchy.

       *       *       *       *       *

_First Suboctile_.--The image once seen is perfectly clear and
bright.

_First Octile_.--I can see my breakfast-table or any equally
familiar thing with my mind's eye quite as well in all particulars
as I can do if the reality is before me.

_First Quartile_--Fairly clear; illumination of actual scene is
fairly represented. Well defined. Parts do not obtrude themselves,
but attention has to be directed to different points in succession
to call up the whole.

_Middlemost_.--Fairly clear. Brightness probably at least from
one-half to two-thirds of the original. Definition varies very much,
one or two objects being much more distinct than the others, but the
latter come out clearly if attention be paid to them.

_Last Quartile_.--Dim, certainly not comparable to the actual scene.
I have to think separately of the several things on the table to
bring them clearly before the mind's eye, and when I think of some
things the others fade away in confusion.

_Last Octile_.--Dim and not comparable in brightness to the real
scene. Badly defined, with blotches of light; very incomplete; very
little of one object is seen at one time.

_Last Suboctile_.--I am very rarely able to recall any object
whatever with any sort of distinctness. Very occasionally an object
or image will recall itself, but even then it is more like a
generalised image than an individual one. I seem to be almost
destitute of visualising power as under control.

_Lowest_.--My powers are zero. To my consciousness there is almost
no association of memory with objective visual impressions. I
recollect the table, but do not see it.

I next proceed to colour, as specified in the third of my questions,
and annex a selection from the returns classified on the same
principle as in the preceding paragraph.


COLOUR REPRESENTATION.

_Highest_.--Perfectly distinct, bright, and natural.

_First Suboctile_.--White cloth, blue china, argand coffee-pot,
buff stand with sienna drawing, toast--all clear.

_First Octile_.--All details seen perfectly.

_First Quartile_.--Colours distinct and natural till I begin to
puzzle over them.

_Middlemost_.--Fairly distinct, though not certain that they are
accurately recalled.

_Last Quartile_.--Natural, but very indistinct.

_Last Octile_.--Faint; can only recall colours by a special effort
for each.

_Last Suboctile_.--Power is nil.

_Lowest_.--Power is nil.

It may seem surprising that one out of every sixteen persons who are
accustomed to use accurate expressions should speak of their mental
imagery as perfectly clear and bright; but it is so, and many
details are added in various returns emphasising the assertion. One
of the commonest of these is to the effect, "If I could draw, I am
sure I could draw perfectly from my mental image." That some artists,
such as Blake, have really done so is beyond dispute, but I have
little doubt that there is an unconscious exaggeration in these
returns. My reason for saying so is that I have also returns from
artists, who say as follows: "My imagery is so clear, that if I had
been unable to draw I should have unhesitatingly said that I could
draw from it." A foremost painter of the present day has used that
expression. He finds deficiencies and gaps when he tries to draw
from his mental vision. There is perhaps some analogy between these
images and those of "faces in the fire." One may often fancy an
exceedingly well-marked face or other object in the burning coals,
but probably everybody will find, as I have done, that it is
impossible to draw it, for as soon as its outlines are seriously
studied, the fancy flies away.

Mr. Flinders Petrie, a contributor of interesting experiments on
kindred subjects to _Nature_, informs me that he habitually works
out sums by aid of an imaginary sliding rule, which he sets in the
desired way and reads off mentally. He does not usually visualise
the whole rule, but only that part of it with which he is at the
moment concerned (see Plate II. Fig. 34, where, however, the artist
has not put in the divisions very correctly). I think this is one of
the most striking cases of accurate visualising power it is possible
to imagine.

I have a few returns from chess-players who play games blindfolded;
but the powers of such men to visualise the separate boards with
different sets of men on the different boards, some ivory, some wood,
and so forth, are well known, and I need not repeat them. I will
rather give the following extract from an article in the _Pall Mall
Gazette_, 27th June 1882, on the recent chess tournament at Vienna:--

"The modern feats of blindfold play (without sight of board) greatly
surpass those of twenty years ago. Paul Morphy, the American, was
the first who made an especial study of this kind of display,
playing some seven or eight games blindfold and simultaneously
against various inferior opponents, and making lucrative exhibitions
in this way. His abilities in this line created a scare among other
rivals who had not practised this test of memory. Since his day many
chess-players who are gifted with strong and clear memory and power
of picturing to the mind the ideal board and men, have carried this
branch of exhibition play far beyond Morphy's pitch; and,
contemporaneously with this development, it has become acknowledged
that skill in blindfold play is not an absolute test of similarly
relative powers over the board: _e.g._ Blackburne and Zukertort can
play as many as sixteen, or even twenty, blindfold games at a time,
and win about 80 per cent of them at least. Steinitz, who beats them
both in match play, does not essay more than six blindfold at a time.
Mason does not, to our knowledge, make any _specialite_ at all of
this sort."

I have many cases of persons mentally reading off scores when
playing the pianoforte, or manuscript when they are making speeches.
One statesman has assured me that a certain hesitation in utterance
which he has at times, is due to his being plagued by the image of
his manuscript speech with its original erasures and corrections. He
cannot lay the ghost, and he puzzles in trying to decipher it.

Some few persons see mentally in print every word that is uttered;
they attend to the visual equivalent and not to the sound of the
words, and they read them off usually as from a long imaginary strip
of paper, such as is unwound from telegraphic instruments. The
experiences differ in detail as to size and kind of type, colour of
paper, and so forth, but are always the same in the same person.

A well-known frequenter of the Royal Institution tells me that he
often craves for an absence of visual perceptions, they are so
brilliant and persistent. The Rev. George Henslow speaks of their
extreme restlessness; they oscillate, rotate, and change.

It is a mistake to suppose that sharp sight is accompanied by clear
visual memory. I have not a few instances in which the independence
of the two faculties is emphatically commented on; and I have at
least one clear case where great interest in outlines and accurate
appreciation of straightness, squareness, and the like, is
unaccompanied by the power of visualising. Neither does the faculty
go with dreaming. I have cases where it is powerful, and at the same
time where dreams are rare and faint or altogether absent. One
friend tells me that his dreams have not the hundredth part of the
vigour of his waking fancies.

The visualising and the identifying powers are by no means
necessarily combined. A distinguished writer on meta-physical topics
assures me that he is exceptionally quick at recognising a face that
he has seen before, but that he cannot call up a mental image of any
face with clearness.

Some persons have the power of combining in a single perception more
than can be seen at any one moment by the two eyes. It is needless
to insist on the fact that all who have two eyes see stereoscopically,
and therefore somewhat round a corner. Children, who can focus their
eyes on very near objects, must be able to comprise in a single
mental image much more than a half of any small object they are
examining. Animals such as hares, whose eyes are set more on the
side of the head than ours, must be able to perceive at one and the
same instant more of a panorama than we can. I find that a few
persons can, by what they often describe as a kind of touch-sight,
visualise at the same moment all round the image of a solid body.
Many can do so nearly, but not altogether round that of a
terrestrial globe. An eminent mineralogist assures me that he is
able to imagine simultaneously all the sides of a crystal with which
he is familiar. I may be allowed to quote a curious faculty of my
own in respect to this. It is exercised only occasionally and in
dreams, or rather in nightmares, but under those circumstances I am
perfectly conscious of embracing an entire sphere in a single
perception. It appears to lie within my mental eyeball, and to be
viewed centripetally.

This power of comprehension is practically attained in many cases by
indirect methods. It is a common feat to take in the whole
surroundings of an imagined room with such a rapid mental sweep as
to leave some doubt whether it has not been viewed simultaneously.
Some persons have the habit of viewing objects as though they were
partly transparent; thus, if they so dispose a globe in their
imagination as to see both its north and south poles at the same time,
they will not be able to see its equatorial parts. They can also
perceive all the rooms of an imaginary house by a single mental
glance, the walls and floors being as if made of glass. A fourth
class of persons have the habit of recalling scenes, not from the
point of view whence they were observed, but from a distance, and
they visualise their own selves as actors on the mental stage. By
one or other of these ways, the power of seeing the whole of an
object, and not merely one aspect of it, is possessed by many persons.

The place where the image appears to lie, differs much. Most persons
see it in an indefinable sort of way, others see it in front of the
eye, others at a distance corresponding to reality. There exists a
power which is rare naturally, but can, I believe, be acquired
without much difficulty, of projecting a mental picture upon a piece
of paper, and of holding it fast there, so that it can be outlined
with a pencil. To this I shall recur.

Images usually do not become stronger by dwelling on them; the first
idea is commonly the most vigorous, but this is not always the case.
Sometimes the mental view of a locality is inseparably connected
with the sense of its position as regards the points of the compass,
real or imaginary. I have received full and curious descriptions
from very different sources of this strong geographical tendency,
and in one or two cases I have reason to think it allied to a
considerable faculty of geographical comprehension.

The power of visualising is higher in the female sex than in the male,
and is somewhat, but not much, higher in public schoolboys than in
men. After maturity is reached, the further advance of age does not
seem to dim the faculty, but rather the reverse, judging from
numerous statements to that effect; but advancing years are
sometimes accompanied by a growing habit of hard abstract thinking,
and in these cases--not uncommon among those whom I have
questioned--the faculty undoubtedly becomes impaired. There is
reason to believe that it is very high in some young children, who
seem to spend years of difficulty in distinguishing between the
subjective and objective world. Language and book-learning certainly
tend to dull it.

The visualising faculty is a natural gift, and, like all natural
gifts, has a tendency to be inherited. In this faculty the tendency
to inheritance is exceptionally strong, as I have abundant evidence
to prove, especially in respect to certain rather rare peculiarities,
of which I shall speak in the next chapter, and which, when they
exist at all, are usually found among two, three, or more brothers
and sisters, parents, children, uncles and aunts, and cousins.

Since families differ so much in respect to this gift, we may
suppose that races would also differ, and there can be no doubt that
such is the case. I hardly like to refer to civilised nations,
because their natural faculties are too much modified by education
to allow of their being appraised in an off-hand fashion. I may,
however, speak of the French, who appear to possess the visualising
faculty in a high degree. The peculiar ability they show in
prearranging ceremonials _fetes_ of all kinds, and their undoubted
genius for tactics and strategy, show that they are able to foresee
effects with unusual clearness. Their ingenuity in all technical
contrivances is an additional testimony in the same direction, and
so is their singular clearness of expression. Their phrase,
"figurez-vous," or "picture to yourself," seems to express their
dominant mode of perception. Our equivalent of "imagine" is ambiguous.

It is among uncivilised races that natural differences in the
visualising faculty are most conspicuous. Many of them make carvings
and rude illustrations, but only a few have the gift of carrying a
picture in their mind's eye, judging by the completeness and
firmness of their designs, which show no trace of having been
elaborated in that step-by-step manner which is characteristic of
draughtsmen who are not natural artists.

Among the races who are thus gifted are the commonly despised, but,
as I confidently maintain from personal knowledge of them, the much
underrated Bushmen of South Africa. They are no doubt deficient in
the natural instincts necessary to civilisation, for they detest a
regular life, they are inveterate thieves, and are incapable of
withstanding the temptation of strong drink. On the other hand, they
have few superiors among barbarians in the ingenious methods by
which they supply the wants of a difficult existence, and in the
effectiveness and nattiness of their accoutrements. One of their
habits is to draw pictures on the walls of caves of men and animals,
and to colour them with ochre. These drawings were once numerous,
but they have been sadly destroyed by advancing colonisation, and
few of them, and indeed few wild Bushmen, now exist. Fortunately a
large and valuable collection of facsimiles of Bushman art was made
before it became too late by Mr. Stow, of the Cape Colony, who has
very lately sent some specimens of them to this country, in the hope
that means might be found for the publication of the entire series.
Among the many pictures of animals in each of the large sheets full
of them, I was particularly struck with one of an eland as giving a
just idea of the precision and purity of their best work. Others,
again, were exhibited last summer at the Anthropological Institute
by Mr. Hutchinson.

The method by which the Bushmen draw is described in the following
extract from a letter written to me by Dr. Mann, the well-known
authority on South African matters of science. The boy to whom he
refers belonged to a wild tribe living in caves in the Drakenberg,
who plundered outlying farms, and were pursued by the neighbouring
colonists. He was wounded and captured, then sent to hospital, and
subsequently taken into service. He was under Dr. Mann's observation
in the year 1860, and has recently died, to the great regret of his
employer, Mr. Proudfoot, to whom he became a valuable servant.

Dr. Mann writes as follows:--

"This lad was very skilful in the proverbial Bushman art of
drawing animal figures, and upon several occasions I induced
him to show me how this was managed among his people. He
invariably began by jotting down upon paper or on a slate a
number of isolated dots which presented no connection or trace
of outline of any kind to the uninitiated eye, but looked like
the stars scattered promiscuously in the sky. Having with much
deliberation satisfied himself of the sufficiency of these dots,
he forthwith began to run a free bold line from one to the other,
and as he did so the form of an animal--horse, buffalo, elephant,
or some kind of antelope--gradually developed itself. This was
invariably done with a free hand, and with such unerring accuracy
of touch, that no correction of a line was at any time attempted.
I understood from the lad that this was the plan which was invariably
pursued by his kindred in making their clever pictures."

It is impossible, I think, for a drawing to be made on this method
unless the artist had a clear image in his mind's eye of what he was
about to draw, and was able, in some degree, to project it on the
paper or slate.

Other living races have the gift of drawing, but none more so than
the Eskimo. I will therefore speak of these and not of the
Australian and Tasmanian pictures, nor of the still ruder
performances of the old inhabitants of Guiana, nor of those of some
North American tribes, as the Iroquois. The Eskimos are geographers
by instinct, and appear to see vast tracts of country mapped out in
their heads. From the multitude of illustrations of their
map-drawing powers, I may mention one of those included in the
journals of Captain Hall, at p. 224, which were published in 1879 by
the United States Government, under the editorship of Professor J. E.
Nourse. It is the facsimile of a chart drawn by an Eskimo who was a
thorough barbarian in the accepted sense of the word; that is to say,
he spoke no language besides his own uncouth tongue, he was wholly
uneducated according to our modern ideas, and he lived in what we
should call a savage fashion. This man drew from memory a chart of
the region over which he had at one time or another gone in his canoe.
It extended from Pond's Bay, in lat. 73 deg., to Fort Churchill, in lat.
58 deg.44', over a distance in a straight line of more than 960 nautical,
or 1100 English miles, the coast being so indented by arms of the
sea that its length is six times as great. On comparing this rough
Eskimo outline with the Admiralty chart of 1870, their accordance is
remarkable. I have seen many MS. route maps made by travellers a few
years since, when the scientific exploration of the world was much
less advanced than it is now, and I can confidently say that I have
never known of any traveller, white or brown, civilised or
uncivilised, in Africa, Asia, or Australia, who, being unprovided
with surveying instruments, and trusting to his memory alone, has
produced a chart comparable in extent and accuracy to that of this
barbarous Eskimo. The aptitude of the Eskimos to draw, is abundantly
shown by the numerous illustrations in Rink's work, all of which
were made by self-taught men, and are thoroughly realistic.

So much for the wild races of the present day; but even the Eskimo
are equalled in their power of drawing by the men of old times. In
ages so far gone by, that the interval that separates them from our
own may be measured in perhaps hundreds of thousands of years, when
Europe was mostly icebound, a race who, in the opinion of all
anthropologists, was closely allied to the modern Eskimo, lived in
caves in the more habitable places. Many broken relics of that race
have been found; some few of these are of bone engraved with flints
or carved into figures, and among these are representations of the
mammoth, elk, and reindeer, which, if made by an English labourer
with the much better implements at his command, would certainly
attract local attention and lead to his being properly educated, and
in much likelihood to his becoming a considerable artist if he had
intellectual powers to match.

It is not at all improbable that these prehistoric men had the same
geographical instincts as the modern Eskimo, whom they closely
resemble in every known respect. If so, it is perfectly possible
that scraps of charts scratched on bone or stone, of prehistoric
Europe, when the distribution of land, sea, and ice was very
different to what it is now, may still exist, buried underground,
and may reward the zeal of some future cave explorer.

There is abundant evidence that the visualising faculty admits of
being developed by education. The testimony on which I would
lay especial stress is derived from the published experiences of
M. Lecoq de Boisbaudran, late director of the Ecole Nationale de Dessein,
in Paris, which are related in his _Education de la M. emoire
Pittoresque_ [1] He trained his pupils with extraordinary success,
beginning with the simplest figures. They were made to study the
models thoroughly before they tried to draw them from memory. One
favourite expedient was to associate the sight memory with the
muscular memory, by making his pupils follow at a distance the
outlines of the figures with a pencil held in their hands. After
three or four months' practice, their visual memory became greatly
strengthened. They had no difficulty in summoning images at will, in
holding them steady, and in drawing them. Their copies [7] were
executed with marvellous fidelity, as attested by a commission of
the Institute, appointed in 1852 to inquire into the matter, of
which the eminent painter Horace Vernet was a member. The present
Slade Professor of Fine Arts at University College, M. Legros, was a
pupil of M. de Boisbaudran. He has expressed to me his indebtedness
to the system, and he has assured me of his own success in teaching
others in a somewhat similar way.

[Footnote 7: Republished in an 8vo, entitled _Enseignment
Artistique_. Morel et Cie. Paris, 1879.]

Colonel Moncrieff informs me that, when wintering in 1877 near Fort
Garry in North America, young Indians occasionally came to his
quarters, and that he found them much interested in any pictures or
prints that were put before them. On one of these occasions he saw
an Indian tracing the outline of a print from the _Illustrated News_
very carefully with the point of his knife. The reason he gave for
this odd manoeuvre was, that he would remember the better how to
carve it when he returned home.

I could mention instances within my own experience in which the
visualising faculty has become strengthened by practice; notably one
of an eminent electrical engineer, who had the power of recalling
form with unusual precision, but not colour. A few weeks after he
had replied to my questions, he told me that my inquiries had
induced him to practise his colour memory, and that he had done so
with such success that he was become quite an adept at it, and that
the newly-acquired power was a source of much pleasure to him.

A useful faculty, easily developed by practice, is that of retaining
a retinal picture. A scene is flashed upon the eye; the memory of it
persists, and details, which escaped observation during the brief
time when it was actually seen, may be analysed and studied at
leisure in the subsequent vision.

The memories we should aim at acquiring are, however, such as are
based on a thorough understanding of the objects observed. In no
case is this more surely effected than in the processes of
mechanical drawing, where the intended structure has to be portrayed
so exactly in plan, elevation, side view, and sections, that the
workman has simply to copy the drawing in metal, wood, or stone, as
the case may be. It is undoubtedly the fact that mechanicians,
engineers, and architects usually possess the faculty of seeing
mental images with remarkable clearness and precision.

A few dots like those used by the Bushmen give great assistance in
creating an imaginary picture, as proved by our general habit of
working out ideas by the help of marks and rude lines. The use of
dolls by children also testifies to the value of an objective
support in the construction of mental images. The doll serves as a
kind of skeleton for the child to clothe with fantastic attributes,
and the less individuality the doll has, the more it is appreciated
by the child, who can the better utilise it as a lay figure in many
different characters. The chief art of strengthening visual, as well
as every other form of memory, lies in multiplying associations; the
healthiest memory being that in which all the associations are
logical, and toward which all the senses concur in their due
proportions. It is wonderful how much the vividness of a
recollection is increased when two or more lines of association are
simultaneously excited. Thus the inside of a known house is much
better visualised when we are looking at its outside than when we
are away from it, and some chess-players have told me that it is
easier for them to play a game from memory when they have a blank
board before them than when they have not.

There is an absence of flexibility in the mental imagery of most
persons. They find that the first image they have acquired of any
scene is apt to hold its place tenaciously in spite of subsequent
need of correction. They find a difficulty in shifting their mental
view of an object, and examining it at pleasure in different
positions. If they see an object equally often in many positions the
memories combine and confuse one another, forming a "composite" blur,
which they cannot dissect into its components. They are less able to
visualise the features of intimate friends than those of persons of
whom they have caught only a single glance. Many such persons have
expressed to me their grief at finding themselves powerless to
recall the looks of dear relations whom they had lost, while they
had no difficulty in recollecting faces that were uninteresting to
them.

Others have a complete mastery over their mental images. They can
call up the figure of a friend and make it sit on a chair or stand
up at will; they can make it turn round and attitudinise in any way,
as by mounting it on a bicycle or compelling it to perform gymnastic
feats on a trapeze. They are able to build up elaborate geometric
structures bit by bit in their mind's eye, and add, subtract, or
alter at will and at leisure. This free action of a vivid
visualising faculty is of much importance in connection with the
higher processes of generalised thought, though it is commonly put
to no such purpose, as may be easily explained by an example. Suppose
a person suddenly to accost another with the following words:--
"I want to tell you about a boat." What is the idea that the word
"boat" would be likely to call up? I tried the experiment with this
result. One person, a young lady, said that she immediately saw the
image of a rather large boat pushing off from the shore, and that it
was full of ladies and gentlemen, the ladies being dressed in white
and blue. It is obvious that a tendency to give so specific an
interpretation to a general word is absolutely opposed to philosophic
thought. Another person, who was accustomed to philosophise, said
that the word "boat" had aroused no definite image, because he had
purposely held his mind in suspense. He had exerted himself not to
lapse into any one of the special ideas that he felt the word boat
was ready to call up, such as a skiff, wherry, barge, launch, punt,
or dingy. Much more did he refuse to think of any one of these with
any particular freight or from any particular point of view. A habit
of suppressing mental imagery must therefore characterise men who
deal much with abstract ideas; and as the power of dealing easily
and firmly with these ideas is the surest criterion of a high order
of intellect, we should expect that the visualising faculty would be
starved by disuse among philosophers, and this is precisely what I
found on inquiry to be the case.

But there is no reason why it should be so, if the faculty is free
in its action, and not tied to reproduce hard and persistent forms;
it may then produce generalised pictures out of its past experiences
quite automatically. It has no difficulty in reducing images to the
same scale, owing to our constant practice in watching objects as
they approach or recede, and consequently grow or diminish in
apparent size. It readily shifts images to any desired point of the
field of view, owing to our habit of looking at bodies in motion to
the right or left, upward or downward. It selects images that
present the same aspect, either by a simple act of memory or by a
feat of imagination that forces them into the desired position, and
it has little or no difficulty in reversing them from right to left,
as if seen in a looking-glass. In illustration of these generalised
mental images, let us recur to the boat, and suppose the speaker to
continue as follows:--"The boat was a four-oared racing-boat, it was
passing quickly to the left just in front of me, and the men were
bending forward to take a fresh stroke." Now at this point of the
story the listener ought to have a picture well before his eye. It
ought to have the distinctness of a real four-oar going to the left,
at the moment when many of its details still remained unheeded, such
as the dresses of the men and their individual features. It would be
the generic image of a four-oar formed by the combination into a
single picture of a great many sight memories of those boats.

In the highest minds a descriptive word is sufficient to evoke
crowds of shadowy associations, each striving to manifest itself.
When they differ so much from one another as to be unfitted for
combination into a single idea, there will be a conflict, each being
prevented by the rest from obtaining sole possession of the field of
consciousness. There could, therefore, be no definite imagery so
long as the aggregate of all the pictures that the word suggested of
objects presenting similar aspects, reduced to the same size, and
accurately superposed, resulted in a blur; but a picture would
gradually evolve as qualifications were added to the word, and it
would attain to the distinctness and vividness of a generic image
long before the word had been so restricted as to be individualised.
If the intellect be slow, though correct in its operations, the
associations will be few, and the generalised image based on
insufficient data. If the visualising power be faint, the
generalised image will be indistinct.

I cannot discover any closer relation between high visualising power
and the intellectual faculties than between verbal memory and those
same faculties. That it must afford immense help in some professions
stands to reason, but in ordinary social life the possession of a
high visualising power, as of a high verbal memory, may pass quite
unobserved. I have to the last failed in anticipating the character
of the answers that my friends would give to my inquiries, judging
from my previous knowledge of them; though I am bound to say that,
having received their answers, I could usually persuade myself that
they were justified by my recollections of their previous sayings
and conduct generally.

The faculty is undoubtedly useful in a high degree to inventive
mechanicians, and the great majority of those whom I have questioned
have spoken of their powers as very considerable. They invent their
machines as they walk, and see them in height, breadth, and depth as
real objects, and they can also see them in action. In fact, a
periodic action of any kind appears to be easily recalled. But the
powers of other men are considerably less; thus an engineer officer
who has himself great power of visual memory, and who has
superintended the mathematical education of cadets, doubts if one in
ten can visualise an object in three dimensions. I should have
thought the faculty would be common among geometricians, but many of
the highest seem able somehow to get on without much of it. There is
a curious dictum of Napoleon I. quoted in Hume's _Precis of Modern
Tactics_, p. 15, of which I can neither find the original authority
nor do I fully understand the meaning. He is reported to have said
that "there are some who, from some physical or moral peculiarity of
character, form a picture (_tableau_) of everything. No matter what
knowledge, intellect, courage, or good qualities they may have,
these men are unfit to command." It is possible that "tableau"
should be construed rather in the sense of a pictorial composition,
which, like an epigrammatic sentence, may be very complete and
effective, but not altogether true.

There can, however, be no doubt as to the utility of the visualising
faculty when it is duly subordinated to the higher intellectual
operations. A visual image is the most perfect form of mental
representation wherever the shape, position, and relations of
objects in space are concerned. It is of importance in every
handicraft and profession where design is required. The best workmen
are those who visualise the whole of what they propose to do, before
they take a tool in their hands. The village smith and the carpenter
who are employed on odd jobs employ it no less for their work than
the mechanician, the engineer, and the architect. The lady's maid
who arranges a new dress requires it for the same reason as the
decorator employed on a palace, or the agent who lays out great
estates. Strategists, artists of all denominations, physicists who
contrive new experiments, and in short all who do not follow routine,
have need of it. The pleasure its use can afford is immense. I have
many correspondents who say that the delight of recalling beautiful
scenery and great works of art is the highest that they know; they
carry whole picture galleries in their minds. Our bookish and wordy
education tends to repress this valuable gift of nature. A faculty
that is of importance in all technical and artistic occupations,
that gives accuracy to our perceptions, and justness to our
generalisations, is starved by lazy disuse, instead of being
cultivated judiciously in such a way as will on the whole bring the
best return. I believe that a serious study of the best method of
developing and utilising this faculty, without prejudice to the
practice of abstract thought in symbols, is one of the many pressing
desiderata in the yet unformed science of education.




NUMBER-FORMS.

Persons who are imaginative almost invariably think of _numerals_ in
some form of visual imagery. If the idea of _six_ occurs to them,
the word "six" does not sound in their mental ear, but the figure 6
in a written or printed form rises before their mental eye. The
clearness of the images of numerals, and the number of them that can
be mentally viewed at the same time, differs greatly in different
persons. The most common case is to see only two or three figures at
once, and in a position too vague to admit of definition. There are
a few persons in whom the visualising faculty is so low that they
can mentally see neither numerals nor anything else; and again there
are a few in whom it is so high as to give rise to hallucinations.
Those who are able to visualise a numeral with a distinctness
comparable to reality, and to behold it as if it were before their
eyes, and not in some sort of dreamland, will define the direction in
which it seems to lie, and the distance at which it appears to be.
If they were looking at a ship on the horizon at the moment that the
figure 6 happened to present itself to their minds, they could say
whether the image lay to the left or right of the ship, and whether
it was above or below the line of the horizon; they could always
point to a definite spot in space, and say with more or less
precision that that was the direction in which the image of the
figure they were thinking of, first appeared.

Now the strange psychological fact to which I desire to draw
attention, is that among persons who visualise figures clearly there
are many who notice that the image of the same figure invariably
makes its first appearance in the same direction, and at the same
distance. Such a person would always see the figure when it first
appeared to him at (we may suppose) one point of the compass to the
left of the line between his eye and the ship, at the level of the
horizon, and at twenty feet distance. Again, we may suppose that he
would see the figure 7 invariably half a point to the left of the
ship, at an altitude equal to the sun's diameter above the horizon,
and at thirty feet distance; similarly for all the other figures.
Consequently, when he thinks of the series of numerals 1, 2, 3, 4,
etc., they show themselves in a definite pattern that always
occupies an identical position in his field of view with respect to
the direction in which he is looking.

Those who do not see figures with the same objectivity, use
nevertheless the same expressions with reference to their mental
field of view. They can draw what they see in a manner fairly
satisfactory to themselves, but they do not locate it so strictly in
reference to their axis of sight and to the horizontal plane that
passes through it. It is with them as in dreams, the imagery is
before and around, but the eyes during sleep are turned inwards and
upwards.

The pattern or "Form" in which the numerals are seen is by no means
the same in different persons, but assumes the most grotesque
variety of shapes, which run in all sorts of angles, bends, curves,
and zigzags as represented in the various illustrations to this
chapter. The drawings, however, fail in giving the idea of their
apparent size to those who see them; they usually occupy a wider
range than the mental eye can take in at a single glance, and compel
it to wander. Sometimes they are nearly panoramic.

These Forms have for the most part certain characteristics in common.
They are stated in all cases to have been in existence, so far as
the earlier numbers in the Form are concerned, as long back as the
memory extends; they come into view quite independently of the will,
and their shape and position, at all events in the mental field of
view, is nearly invariable. They have other points in common to
which I shall shortly draw attention, but first I will endeavour to
remove all doubt as to the authenticity and trustworthiness of these
statements.

I see no "Form" myself, and first ascertained that such a thing
existed through a letter from Mr. G. Bidder, Q.C., in which he
described his own case as a very curious peculiarity. I was at the
time making inquiries about the strength of the visualising faculty
in different persons, and among the numerous replies that reached me
I soon collected ten or twelve other cases in which the writers
spoke of their seeing numerals in definite forms. Though the
information came from independent sources, the expressions used were
so closely alike that they strongly corroborated one another. Of
course I eagerly followed up the inquiry, and when I had collected
enough material to justify publication, I wrote an account which
appeared in _Nature_ on 15th January 1880, with several illustrations.
This has led to a wide correspondence and to a much-increased store
of information, which enables me to arrive at the following
conclusions. The answers I received whenever I have pushed my
questions, have been straightforward and precise. I have not
unfrequently procured a second sketch of the Form even after more
than two years' interval, and found it to agree closely with the
first one. I have also questioned many of my own friends in general
terms as to whether they visualise numbers in any particular way.
The large majority are unable to do so. But every now and then I
meet with persons who possess the faculty, and I have become
familiar with the quick look of intelligence with which they receive
my question. It is as though some chord had been struck which had
not been struck before, and the verbal answers they give me are
precisely of the same type as those written ones of which I have now
so many. I cannot doubt of the authenticity of independent statements
which closely confirm one another, nor of the general accuracy of
the accompanying sketches, because I find now that my collection is
large enough for classification, that they might be arranged in an
approximately continuous series. I am often told that the
peculiarity is common to the speaker and to some near relative, and
that they had found such to be the case by accident. I have the
strongest evidence of its hereditary character after allowing, and
over-allowing, for all conceivable influences of education and
family tradition.

Last of all, I took advantage of the opportunity afforded by a
meeting of the Anthropological Institute to read a memoir there on
the subject, and to bring with me many gentlemen well known in the
scientific world, who have this habit of seeing numerals in Forms,
and whose diagrams were suspended on the walls. Amongst them are
Mr. G. Bidder, Q.C., the Rev. Mr. G. Henslow, the botanist;
Prof. Schuster, F.R.S., the physicist; Mr. Roget, Mr. Woodd Smith,
and Colonel Yule, C.B., the geographer. These diagrams are given
in Plate I. Figs. 20-24. I wished that some of my foreign
correspondents could also have been present, such as M. Antoine
d'Abbadie, the well-known French traveller and Membre de l'Institut,
and Baron v. Osten Sacken, the Russian diplomatist and entomologist,
for they had given and procured me much information.

I feel sure that I have now said enough to remove doubts as to the
authenticity of my data. Their trustworthiness will, I trust, be
still more apparent as I proceed; it has been abundantly manifest to
myself from the internal evidences in a large mass of correspondence,
to which I can unfortunately do no adequate justice in a brief memoir.
It remains to treat the data in the same way as any other scientific
facts and to extract as much meaning from them as possible.

The peculiarity in question is found, speaking very roughly, in about
1 out of every 30 adult males or 15 females. It consists in the
sudden and automatic appearance of a vivid and invariable "Form" in
the mental field of view, whenever a numeral is thought of, in which
each numeral has its own definite place. This Form may consist of a
mere line of any shape, of a peculiarly arranged row or rows of
figures, or of a shaded space.

I give woodcuts of representative specimens of these Forms, and very
brief descriptions of them extracted from the letters of my
correspondents. Sixty-three other diagrams on a smaller scale will
be found in Plates I., II. and III., and two more which are coloured
are given in Plate IV.

[Illustration: ]

D.A. "From the very first I have seen numerals up to nearly 200,
range themselves always in a particular manner, and in thinking of a
number it always takes its place in the figure. The more attention I
give to the properties of numbers and their interpretations, the
less I am troubled with this clumsy framework for them, but it is
indelible in my mind's eye even when for a long time less
consciously so. The higher numbers are to me quite abstract and
unconnected with a shape. This rough and untidy [8] production is
the best I can do towards representing what I see. There was a
little difficulty in the performance, because it is only by catching
oneself at unawares, so to speak, that one is quite sure that what
one sees is not affected by temporary imagination. But it does not
seem much like, chiefly because the mental picture never seems
_on_ the flat but _in_ a thick, dark gray atmosphere deepening in
certain parts, especially where 1 emerges, and about 20. How I get
from 100 to 120 I hardly know, though if I could require these
figures a few times without thinking of them on purpose, I should
soon notice. About 200 I lose all framework. I do not see the actual
figures very distinctly, but what there is of them is distinguished
from the dark by a thin whitish tracing. It is the place they take
and the shape they make collectively which is invariable. Nothing
more definitely takes its place than a person's age. The person is
usually there so long as his age is in mind."

[Footnote 8: The engraver took much pains to interpret the meaning
of the rather faint but carefully made drawing, by strengthening
some of the shades. The result was very very satisfactory, judging
from the author's own view of it, which is as follows:--"Certainly
if the engraver has been as successful with all the other
representations as with that of my shape and its accompaniments,
your article must be entirely correct."]

T. M. "The representation I carry in my mind of the numerical series
is quite distinct to me, so much so that I cannot think of any
number but I at once see it (as it were) in its peculiar place in
the diagram. My remembrance of dates is also nearly entirely
dependent on a clear mental vision of their _loci_ in the diagram.
This, as nearly as I can draw it, is the following:--"

[Illustration: ]

"It is only approximately correct (if the term 'correct' be at all
applicable). The numbers seem to approach more closely as I ascend
from 10 to 20, 30, 40, etc. The lines embracing a hundred numbers
also seem to approach as I go on to 400, 500, to 1000. Beyond 1000 I
have only the sense of an infinite line in the direction of the arrow,
losing itself in darkness towards the millions. Any special number
of thousands returns in my mind to its position in the parallel
lines from 1 to 1000. The diagram was present in my mind from early
childhood; I remember that I learnt the multiplication table by
reference to it at the age of seven or eight. I need hardly say that
the impression is not that of perfectly straight lines, I have
therefore used no ruler in drawing it."

J.S. "The figures are about a quarter of an inch in length, and in
ordinary type. They are black on a white ground. The numeral 200
generally takes the place of 100 and obliterates it. There is no
light or shade, and the picture is invariable."

[Illustration: ]


                                           etc.  etc.
                                      120+---------------
                                         |
                                         |
                                         |110
                                         |
      30   40   50   60   70   80   90   |
    /
  20|
    |
    |
  10|
    |
   1|


In some cases, the mental eye has to travel along the faintly-marked
and blank paths of a Form, to the place where the numeral that is
wanted is known to reside, and then the figure starts into sight. In
other cases all the numerals, as far as 100 or more, are faintly
seen at once, but the figure that is wanted grows more vivid than its
neighbours; in one of the cases there is, as it were, a chain, and
the particular link rises as if an unseen hand had lifted it. The
Forms are sometimes variously coloured, occasionally very
brilliantly (see Plate IV.). In all of these the definition and
illumination vary much in different parts. Usually the Forms fade
away into indistinctness after 100; sometimes they come to a dead
stop. The higher numbers very rarely fill so large a space in the
Forms as the lower ones, and the diminution of space occupied by
them is so increasingly rapid that I thought it not impossible they
might diminish according to some geometrical law, such as that which
governs sensitivity. I took many careful measurements and averaged
them, but the result did not justify the supposition.

It is beyond dispute that these forms originate at an early age;
they are subsequently often developed in boyhood and youth so as to
include the higher numbers, and, among mathematical students, the
negative values.

Nearly all of my correspondents speak with confidence of their Forms
having been in existence as far back as they recollect. One states
that he knows he possessed it at the age of four; another, that he
learnt his multiplication table by the aid of the elaborate mental
diagram he still uses. Not one in ten is able to suggest any clue as
to their origin. They cannot be due to anything written or printed,
because they do not simulate what is found in ordinary writings or
books.

About one-third of the figures are curved to the left, two-thirds to
the right; they run more often upward than downward. They do not
commonly lie in a single plane. Sometimes a Form has twists as well
as bends, sometimes it is turned upside down, sometimes it plunges
into an abyss of immeasurable depth, or it rises and disappears in
the sky. My correspondents are often in difficulties when trying to
draw them in perspective. One sent me a stereoscopic picture
photographed from a wire that had been bent into the proper shape.
In one case the Form proceeds at first straightforward, then it
makes a backward sweep high above head, and finally recurves into
the pocket, of all places! It is often sloped upwards at a slight
inclination from a little below the level of the eye, just as
objects on a table would appear to a child whose chin was barely
above it.

It may seem strange that children should have such bold conceptions
as of curves sweeping loftily upward or downward to immeasurable
depths, but I think it may be accounted for by their much larger
personal experience of the vertical dimension of space than adults.
They are lifted, tossed and swung, but adults pass their lives very
much on a level, and only judge of heights by inference from the
picture on their retina. Whenever a man first ventures up in a
balloon, or is let, like a gatherer of sea-birds' eggs, over the
face of a precipice, he is conscious of having acquired a much
extended experience of the third dimension of space.

The character of the forms under which historical dates are
visualised contrast strongly with the ordinary Number-Forms. They
are sometimes copied from the numerical ones, but they are more
commonly based both clearly and consciously on the diagrams used in
the schoolroom or on some recollected fancy.

The months of the year are usually perceived as ovals, and they as
often follow one another in a reverse direction to those of the
figures on the clock, as in the same direction. It is a common
peculiarity that the months do not occupy equal spaces, but those
that are most important to the child extend more widely than the rest.
There are many varieties as to the topmost month; it is by no means
always January.

The Forms of the letters of the alphabet, when imaged, as they
sometimes are, in that way, are equally easy to be accounted for,
therefore the ordinary Number-Form is the oldest of all, and
consequently the most interesting. I suppose that it first came into
existence when the child was learning to count, and was used by him
as a natural mnemonic diagram, to which he referred the spoken words
"one," "two," "three," etc. Also, that as soon as he began to read,
the visual symbol figures supplanted their verbal sounds, and
permanently established themselves on the Form. It therefore existed
at an earlier date than that at which the child began to learn to
read; it represents his mental processes at a time of which no other
record remains; it persists in vigorous activity, and offers itself
freely to our examination.

The teachers of many schools and colleges, some in America, have
kindly questioned their pupils for me; the results are given in the
two first columns of Plate I. It appears that the proportion of
young people who see numerals in Forms is greater than that of adults.
But for the most part their Forms are neither well defined nor
complicated. I conclude that when they are too faint to be of
service they are gradually neglected, and become wholly forgotten;
while if they are vivid and useful, they increase in vividness and
definition by the effect of habitual use. Hence, in adults, the two
classes of seers and non-seers are rather sharply defined, the
connecting link of intermediate cases which is observable in
childhood having disappeared.

These Forms are the most remarkable existing instances of what is
called "topical" memory, the essence of which appears to lie in the
establishment of a more exact system of division of labour in the
different parts of the brain, than is usually carried on. Topical
aids to memory are of the greatest service to many persons, and
teachers of mnemonics make large use of them, as by advising a
speaker to mentally associate the corners, etc., of a room with the
chief divisions of the speech he is about to deliver. Those who feel
the advantage of these aids most strongly are the most likely to
cultivate the use of numerical forms. I have read many books on
mnemonics, and cannot doubt their utility to some persons; to myself
the system is of no avail whatever, but simply a stumbling-block,
nevertheless I am well aware that many of my early associations are
fanciful and silly.

The question remains, why do the lines of the Forms run in such
strange and peculiar ways? the reply is, that different persons have
natural fancies for different lines and curves. Their handwriting
shows this, for handwriting is by no means solely dependent on the
balance of the muscles of the hand, causing such and such strokes to
be made with greater facility than others. Handwriting is greatly
modified by the fashion of the time. It is in reality a compromise
between what the writer most likes to produce, and what he can
produce with the greatest ease to himself. I am sure, too, that I
can trace a connection between the general look of the handwritings
of my various correspondents and the lines of their Forms. If a
spider were to visualise numerals, we might expect he would do so in
some web-shaped fashion, and a bee in hexagons. The definite
domestic architecture of all animals as seen in their nests and
holes shows the universal tendency of each species to pursue their
work according to certain definite lines and shapes, which are to
them instinctive and in no way, we may presume, logical. The same is
seen in the groups and formations of flocks of gregarious animals
and in the flights of gregarious birds, among which the wedge-shaped
phalanx of wild ducks and the huge globe of soaring storks are as
remarkable as any.

I used to be much amused during past travels in watching the
different lines of search that were pursued by different persons in
looking for objects lost on the ground, when the encampment was
being broken up. Different persons had decided idiosyncracies, so
much so that if their travelling line of sight could have scored a
mark on the ground, I think the system of each person would have
been as characteristic as his Number-Form.

Children learn their figures to some extent by those on the clock. I
cannot, however, trace the influence of the clock on the Forms in
more than a few cases. In two of them the clock-face actually appears,
in others it has evidently had a strong influence, and in the rest
its influence is indicated, but nothing more. I suppose that the
complex Roman numerals in the clock do not fit in sufficiently well
with the simpler ideas based upon the Arabic ones.

The other traces of the origin of the Forms that appear here and
there, are dominoes, cards, counters, an abacus, the fingers,
counting by coins, feet and inches (a yellow carpenter's rule
appears in one case with 56 in large figures upon it), the country
surrounding the child's home, with its hills and dales, objects in
the garden (one scientific man sees the old garden walk and the
numeral 7 at a tub sunk in the ground where his father filled his
watering-pot). Some associations seem connected with the objects
spoken of in the doggerel verses by which children are often taught
their numbers.

But the paramount influence proceeds from the names of the numerals.
Our nomenclature is perfectly barbarous, and that of other civilised
nations is not better than ours, and frequently worse, as the French
"quatre-vingt dix-huit," or "four score, ten and eight," instead of
ninety-eight. We speak of ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, etc., in
defiance of the beautiful system of decimal notation in which we
write those numbers. What we see is one-naught, one-one, one-two, etc.,
and we should pronounce on that principle, with this proviso, that
the word for the "one" having to show both the place and the value,
should have a sound suggestive of "one" but not identical with it.
Let us suppose it to be the letter _o_ pronounced short as in
"on," then instead of ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, etc., we might
say _on-naught, on-one, on-two, on-three_, etc.

The conflict between the two systems creates a perplexity, to which
conclusive testimony is borne by these numerical forms. In most of
them there is a marked hitch at the 12, and this repeats itself at
the 120. The run of the lines between 1 and 20 is rarely analogous
to that between 20 and 100, where it usually first becomes regular.
The 'teens frequently occupy a larger space than their due. It is not
easy to define in words the variety of traces of the difficulty and
annoyance caused by our unscientific nomenclature, that are
portrayed vividly, and, so to speak, painfully in these pictures.
They are indelible scars that testify to the effort and ingenuity
with which a sort of compromise was struggled for and has finally
been effected between the verbal and decimal systems. I am sure that
this difficulty is more serious and abiding than has been suspected,
not only from the persistency of these twists, which would have long
since been smoothed away if they did not continue to subserve some
useful purpose, but also from experiments on my own mind. I find I
can deal mentally with simple sums with much less strain if I
audibly conceive the figures as on-naught, on-one, etc., and I can
both dictate and write from dictation with much less trouble when
that system or some similar one is adopted. I have little doubt that
our nomenclature is a serious though unsuspected hindrance to the
ready adoption by the public of a decimal system of weights and
measures. Three quarters of the Forms bear a duodecimal impress.

I will now give brief explanations of the Number-Forms drawn in
Plates I., II., and III., and in the two front figures in Plate IV.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATE I.

Fig. 1 is by Mr. Walter Larden, science-master of Cheltenham College,
who sent me a very interesting and elaborate account of his own case,
which by itself would make a memoir; and he has collected other
information for me. The Number-Forms of one of his colleagues and of
that gentleman's sister are given in Figs. 53, 54, Plate III. I
extract the following from Mr. Larden's letter--it is all for which
I can find space:--

[Illustration: PLATE I. _Examples of Number-Forms_.]

"All numbers are to me as images of figures in general; I see them
in ordinary Arabic type (except in some special cases), and they
have definite positions in space (as shown in the Fig.). Beyond 100
I am conscious of coming down a dotted line to the position of 1
again, and of going over the same cycle exactly as before, _e.g._
with 120 in the place of 20, and so on up to 140 or 150. With higher
numbers the imagery is less definite; thus, for 1140, I can only say
that there are no new positions, I do not see the entire number in
the place of 40; but if I think of it as 11 hundred and 40, I see 40
in its place, 11 in its place, and 100 in its place; the picture is
not single though the ideas combine. I seem to stand near 1. I have
to turn somewhat to see from 30-40, and more and more to see from
40-100; 100 lies high up to my right and behind me. I see no shading
nor colour in the figures."

Figs. 2 to 6 are from returns collected for me by the Rev. A.D. Hill,
science-master of Winchester College, who sent me replies from 135
boys of an average age of 14-15. He says, speaking of their replies
to my numerous questions on visualising generally, that they
"represent fairly those who could answer anything; the boys
certainly seemed interested in the subject; the others, who had no
such faculty either attempting and failing, or not finding any
response in their minds, took no interest in the inquiry." A very
remarkable case of hereditary colour association was sent to me by
Mr. Hill, to which I shall refer later. The only five good cases of
Number-Forms among the 135 boys are those shown in the Figs. I need
only describe Fig. 2. The boy says:--"Numbers, except the first
twenty, appear in waves; the two crossing-lines, 60-70, 140-150,
never appear at the _same time_. The first twelve are the image of a
clock, and 13-20 a continuation of them."

Figs. 7, 8, are sent me by Mr. Henry F. Osborn of Princeton in the
United States, who has given cordial assistance in obtaining
information as regards visualising generally. These two are the only
Forms included in sixty returns that he sent, 34 of which were from
Princeton College, and the remaining 26 from Vassar (female) College.
Figs. 9-19 and Fig. 28 are from returns communicated by Mr. W.H.
Poole, science-master of Charterhouse College, which are very
valuable to me as regards visualising power generally. He read my
questions before a meeting of about 60 boys, who all consented to
reply, and he had several subsequent volunteers. All the answers
were short, straightforward, and often amusing. Subsequently the
inquiry extended, and I have 168 returns from him in all, containing
12 good Number-Forms, shown in Figs. 9-19, and in Fig. 28. The
first Fig. is that of Mr. Poole himself; he says, "The line only
represents position; it does not exist in my mind. After 100, I
return to my old starting-place, _e.g._ 140 occupies the same
position as 40."

The gross statistical result from the schoolboys is as follows:
--Total returns, 337: viz. Winchester 135, Princeton 34, Charterhouse
168; the number of these that contained well-defined Number-Forms
are 5, 1, and 12 respectively, or total 18--that is, one in twenty.
It may justly be said that the masters should not be counted,
because it was owing to the accident of their seeing the Number-Forms
themselves that they became interested in the inquiry; if this
objection be allowed, the proportion would become 16 in 337, or one
in twenty-one. Again, some boys who had no visualising faculty at
all could make no sense out of the questions, and wholly refrained
from answering; this would again diminish the proportion. The
shyness in some would help in a statistical return to neutralise the
tendency to exaggeration in others, but I do not think there is much
room for correction on either head. Neither do I think it requisite
to make much allowance for inaccurate answers, as the tone of the
replies is simple and straightforward. Those from Princeton, where
the students are older and had been specially warned, are remarkable
for indications of self-restraint. The result of personal inquiries
among adults, quite independent of and prior to these, gave me the
proportion of 1 in 30 as a provisional result for adults. This is as
well confirmed by the present returns of 1 in 21 among boys and
youths as I could have expected.

I have not a sufficient number of returns from girls for useful
comparison with the above, though I am much indebted to Miss Lewis
for 33 reports, to Miss Cooper of Edgbaston for 10 reports from the
female teachers at her school, and to a few other schoolmistresses,
such as Miss Stones of Carmarthen, whose returns I have utilised in
other ways. The tendency to see Number-Forms is certainly higher in
girls than in boys.

Fig. 20 is the Form of Mr. George Bidder, Q.C.; it is of much
interest to myself, because it was, as I have already mentioned,
through the receipt of it and an accompanying explanation that my
attention was first drawn to the subject. Mr. G. Bidder is son of
the late well-known engineer, the famous "calculating boy" of the
bygone generation, whose marvellous feats in mental arithmetic were
a standing wonder. The faculty is hereditary. Mr. G. Bidder himself
has multiplied mentally fifteen figures by another fifteen figures,
but with less facility than his father. It has been again transmitted,
though in an again reduced degree, to the third generation. He says:
--

"One of the most curious peculiarities in my own case is the
arrangement of the arithmetical numerals. I have sketched this to
the best of my ability. Every number (at least within the first
thousand, and afterwards thousands take the place of units) is
always thought of by me in its own definite place in the series,
where it has, if I may say so, a home and an individuality. I should,
however, qualify this by saying that when I am multiplying together
two large numbers, my mind is engrossed in the operation, and the
idea of locality in the series for the moment sinks out of prominence."

Fig. 21 is that of Prof. Schuster, F.R.S., whose visualising powers
are of a very high order, and who has given me valuable information,
but want of space compels me to extract very briefly. He says to the
effect:--

"The diagram of numerals which I usually see has roughly the shape
of a horse-shoe, lying on a slightly inclined plane, with the open
end towards me. It always comes into view in front of me, a little
to the left, so that the right hand branch of the horse-shoe, at the
bottom of which I place 0, is in front of my left eye. When I move
my eyes without moving my head, the diagram remains fixed in space
and does not follow the movement of my eye. When I move the head the
diagram unconsciously follows the movement, but I can, by an effort,
keep it fixed in space as before. I can also shift it from one part
of the field to the other, and even turn it upside down. I use the
diagram as a resting-place for the memory, placing a number on it
and finding it again when wanted. A remarkable property of the
diagram is a sort of elasticity which enables me to join the two
ends of the horse-shoe together when I want to connect 100 with 0.
The same elasticity causes me to see that part of the diagram on
which I fix my attention larger than the rest."

Mr. Schuster makes occasional use of a simpler form of diagram,
which is little more than a straight line variously divided, and
which I need not describe in detail.

Fig. 22 is by Colonel Yule, C.B.; it is simpler than the others, and
he has found it to become sensibly weaker in later years; it is now
faint and hard to fix.

Fig. 23. Mr. Woodd Smith:--

"Above 200 the form becomes vague and is soon lost, except that 999
is always in a corner like 99. My own position in regard to it is
generally nearly opposite my own age, which is fifty now, at which
point I can face either towards 7-12, or towards 12-20, or 20-7, but
never (I think) with my back to 12-20."

Fig. 24. Mr. Roget. He writes to the effect that the first twelve
are clearly derived from the spots in dominoes. After 100 there is
nothing clear but 108. The form is so deeply engraven in his mind
that a strong effort of the will was required to substitute any
artificial arrangement in its place. His father, the late Dr. Roget
(well known for many years as secretary of the Royal Society), had
trained him in his childhood to the use of the _memoria technica_ of
Feinagle, in which each year has its special place in the walls of a
particular room, and the rooms of a house represent successive
centuries, but he never could locate them in that way. They _would_
go to what seemed their natural homes in the arrangement shown in
the figure, which had come to him from some unknown source.

The remaining Figs., 25-28, in Plate I., sufficiently express
themselves. The last belongs to one of the Charterhouse boys, the
others respectively to a musical critic, to a clergyman, and to a
gentleman who is, I believe, now a barrister.


DESCRIPTION OF PLATE II.

Plate II. contains examples of more complicated Forms, which
severally require so much minuteness of description that I am in
despair of being able to do justice to them separately, and must
leave most of them to tell their own story.

Fig. 34 is that of Mr. Flinders Petrie, to which I have already
referred (p. 66).

Fig. 37 is by Professor Herbert McLeod, F.R.S. I will quote his
letter almost in full, as it is a very good example:--

"When your first article on visualised numerals appeared in _Nature_,
I thought of writing to tell you of my own case, of which I had
never previously spoken to any one, and which I never contemplated
putting on paper. It becomes now a duty to me to do so, for it is a
fourth case of the influence of the clock-face. [In my article I had
spoken of only three cases known to me.--F. G.] The enclosed paper
will give you a rough notion of the apparent positions of numbers in
my mind. That it is due to learning the clock is, I think, proved by
my being able to tell the clock certainly before I was four, and
probably when little more than three, but my mother cannot tell me
the exact date. I had a habit of arranging my spoon and fork on my
plate to indicate the positions of the hands, and I well remember
being astonished at seeing an old watch of my grandmother's which
had ordinary numerals in place of Roman ones. All this happened
before I could read, and I have no recollection of learning the
numbers unless it was by seeing numbers stencilled on the barrels in
my father's brewery.

"When learning the numbers from 12 to 20, they appeared to be
vertically above the 12 of the clock, and you will see from the
enclosed sketch that the most prominent numbers which I have
underlined all occur in the multiplication table. Those doubly
underlined are the most prominent [the lithographer has not rendered
these correctly.--F. G.], and just now I caught myself doing what I
did not anticipate--after doubly underlining some of the numbers, I
found that all the multiples of 12 except 84 are so marked. In the
sketch I have written in all the numbers up to 30; the others are
not added merely for want of space; they appear in their
corresponding positions. You will see that 21 is curiously placed,
probably to get a fresh start for the next 10. The loops gradually
diminish in size as the numbers rise, and it seems rather curious
that the numbers from 100 to 120 resemble in form those from 1 to 20.
Beyond 144 the arrangement is less marked, and beyond 200 they
entirely vanish, although there is some hazy recollection of a
futile attempt to learn the multiplication table up to 20 times 20."

[Illustration: PLATE II. _Examples of Number Forms_.]

"Neither my mother nor my sister is conscious of any mental
arrangement of numerals. I have not found any idea of this kind
among any of my colleagues to whom I have spoken on the subject, and
several of them have ridiculed the notion, and possibly think me a
lunatic for having any such feeling. I was showing the scheme to G.,
shortly after your first article appeared, on the piece of paper I
enclose, and he changed the diagram to a sea-serpent [most amusingly
and grotesquely drawn.--F. G.], with the remark, 'If you were a rich
man, and I knew I was mentioned in your will, I should destroy that
piece of paper, in case it should be brought forward as an evidence
of insanity!' I mention this in connection with a paragraph in your
article."

Fig. 40 is, I think, the most complicated form I possess. It was
communicated to me by Mr. Woodd Smith as that of Miss L. K., a lady
who was governess in a family, whom he had closely questioned both
with inquiries of his own and by submitting others subsequently sent
by myself. It is impossible to convey its full meaning briefly, and
I am not sure that I understand much of the principle of it myself.
A shows part only (I have not room for more) of the series 2, 3, 5, 7,
10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, each as two sides of a square,--that is,
larger or smaller according to the magnitude of the number; 1 does
not appear anywhere. C similarly shows part of the series (all
divisible by 3) of 6, 9, 15, 21, 27, 30, 33, 39, 60, 63, 66, 69, 90,
93, 96. B shows the way in which most numbers divisible by 4 appear.
D shows the form of the numbers 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27,
29, 41, 42-49, 81-83, 85-87, 89, 101-103, 105-107, and 109. E shows
that of 31, 33-35, 37-39. The other numbers are not clear, viz. 50,
51, 53-55, 57-59. Beyond 100 the arrangement becomes hazy, except
that the hundreds and thousands go on again in complete, consecutive,
and proportional squares indefinitely. The groups of figures are not
seen together, but one or other starts up as the number is thought of.
The form has no background, and is always seen _in front_. No Arabic
or other figures are seen with it. Experiments were made as to the
time required to get these images well in the mental view, by
reading to the lady a series of numbers as fast as she could
visualise them. The first series consisted of twenty numbers of two
figures each--thus, 17, 28, 13, 52, etc.; these were gone through on
the first trial in 22 seconds, on the second in 16, and on the third
in 26. The second series was more varied, containing numbers of one,
two, and three figures--thus 121, 117, 345, 187, 13, 6, 25, etc.,
and these were gone through in three trials in 25, 25, and 22 seconds
respectively, forming a general result of 23 seconds for twenty
numbers, or 2-1/3 seconds per number. A noticeable feature in this
case is the strict accordance of the scale of the image with the
magnitude of the number, and the geometric regularity of the figures.
Some that I drew, and sent for the lady to see, did not at all
satisfy her eye as to their correctness.

I should say that not a few mental calculators work by bulks rather
than by numerals; they arrange concrete magnitudes symmetrically in
rank and file like battalions, and march these about. I have one
case where each number in a Form seems to bear its own _weight_.

Fig. 45 is a curious instance of a French Member of the Institute,
communicated to me by M. Antoine d'Abbadie (whose own Number-Form is
shown in Fig. 44):--

"He was asked, why he puts 4 in so conspicuous a place; he replied,
'You see that such a part of my name (which he wishes to withhold)
means 4 in the south of France, which is the cradle of my family;
consequently _quatre est ma raison d'etre_.'"

Subsequently, in 1880, M. d'Abbadie wrote:--

"I mentioned the case of a philosopher whose, 4, 14, 24, etc., all
step out of the rank in his mind's eye. He had a haze in his mind
from 60, I believe [it was 50.--F.G.], up to 80; but latterly 80 has
sprung out, not like the sergeants 4, 14, 24, but like a captain,
farther out still, and five or six times as large as the privates 1,
2, 3, 5, 6, etc. 'Were I superstitious,' said he, 'I should
conclude that my death would occur in the 80th year of the century.'
The growth of 80 was _sudden_, and has remained constant ever since."

This is the only case known to me of a new stage in the development
of a Number-Form being suddenly attained.


DESCRIPTION OF PLATE III.

Plate III. is intended to exhibit some instances of heredity. I have
no less than twenty-two families in which this curious tendency is
hereditary, and there may be many more of which I am still ignorant.
I have found it to extend in at least eight of these beyond the near
degrees of parent and child, and brother and sister. Considering that
the occurrence is so rare as to exist in only about one in every
twenty-five or thirty males, these results are very remarkable, and
their trustworthiness is increased by the fact that the hereditary
tendency is on the whole the strongest in those cases where the
Number-Forms are the most defined and elaborate. I give four
instances in which the hereditary tendency is found, not only in
having a Form at all, but also in some degree in the shape of the
Form.

Figs. 46-49 are those of various members of the Henslow family,
where the brothers, sisters, and some children of a sister have the
peculiarity.

Figs. 53-54 are those of a master of Cheltenham College and his
sister.

Figs. 55-56 are those of a father and son; 57 and 58 belong to the
same family.

Figs. 59-60 are those of a brother and sister.

The lower half of the Plate explains itself. The last figure of all,
Fig. 65, is of interest, because it was drawn for an intelligent
little girl of only 11 years old, after she had been closely
questioned by the father, and it was accompanied by elaborate
coloured illustrations of months and days of the week. I thought
this would be a good test case, so I let the matter drop for two
years, and then begged the father to question the child casually,
and to send me a fresh account. I asked at the same time if any
notes had been kept of the previous letter. Nothing could have come
out more satisfactorily. No notes had been kept; the subject
had passed out of mind, but the imagery remained the same, with some
trifling and very interesting metamorphoses of details.

[Illustration: PLATE III. _Examples of an Hereditary Tendency to see
Number-Forms_, _4 Instances where the Number Forms in same family
are alike_ _3 Instances where the Number-Forms in same family are
unlike_]


DESCRIPTION OF PLATE IV.

I can find room in Plate IV. for only two instances of coloured
Number-Forms, though others are described in Plate III. Fig. 64 is
by Miss Rose G. Kingsley, daughter of the late eminent writer the Rev.
Charles Kingsley, and herself an authoress. She says:--

"Up to 30 I see the numbers in clear white; to 40 in gray; 40-50 in
flaming orange; 50-60 in green; 60-70 in dark blue; 70 I am not sure
about; 80 is reddish, I think; and 90 is yellow; but these latter
divisions are very indistinct in my mind's eye."

She subsequently writes:--

"I now enclose my diagram; it is very roughly done, I am afraid, not
nearly as well as I should have liked to have done it. My great fear,
has been that in thinking it over I might be led to write down
something more than what I actually see, but I hope I have avoided
this."

Fig. 65 is an attempt at reproducing the form sent by Mr. George F.
Smythe of Ohio, an American correspondent who has contributed much
of interest. He says:--

"To me the numbers from 1 to 20 lie on a level plane, but from 20
they slope up to 100 at an angle of about 25 deg. Beyond 100 they are
generally all on a level, but if for any reason I have to think of
the numbers from 100 to 200, or from 200 to 300, etc., then the
numbers, between these two hundreds, are arranged just as those from
1 to 100 are. I do not, when thinking of a number, picture to
myself the figures which represent it, but I do think instantly of
the place which it occupies along the line. Moreover, in the case of
numbers from 1 to 20 (and, indistinctly, from 20 up to 28 or 30), I
always picture the number--not the figures--as occupying a
right-angled parallelogram about twice as long as it is broad. These
numbers all lie down flat and extend in a straight line from 1 to 12
over an unpleasant, arid, sandy plain. At 12 the line turns abruptly
to the right, passes into a pleasanter region where grass grows, and
so continues up to 20. At 20 the line turns to the left, and passes
up the before-described incline to 100. This figure will help you in
understanding my ridiculous notions. The asterisk (*) marks the
place where I commonly seem to myself to stand and view the line. At
times I take other positions, but never any position to the left of
the (*), nor to the right of the line from 20 upwards. I do not
associate colours with numbers, but there is a great difference in
the illumination which different numbers receive. If a traveller
should start at 1 and walk to 100, he would be in an intolerable
glare of light until near 9 or 10. But at 11 he would go into a land
of darkness and would have to feel his way. At 12 light breaks in
again, a pleasant sunshine, which continues up to 19 or 20, where
there is a sort of twilight. From here to 40 the illumination is
feeble, but still there is considerable light. At 40 things light up,
and until one reaches 56 or 57 there is broad daylight. Indeed the
tract from 48 to 50 is almost as bad as that from 1 to 9. Beyond 60
there is a fair amount of light up to about 97, From this point to
100 it is rather cloudy."

In a subsequent letter he adds:--

"I enclose a picture in perspective and colour of my 'form.' I have
taken great pains with this, but am far from satisfied with it. I
know nothing about drawing, and consequently am unable to put upon
the paper just what I see. The faults which I find with the picture
are these. The rectangles stand out too distinctly, as something
lying on the plane instead of being, as they ought, a part of the
plane. The view is taken of necessity from an unnatural stand-point,
and some way or other the region 1-12 does not look right. The
landscape is altogether too distinct in its features. I rather
_know that there is_ grass, and that there are trees in the
distance, than _see_ them. But the grass within a few feet of the
line I see distinctly. I cannot make the hill at the right slope
down to the plane as it ought. It is too steep. I have had my poor
success in indicating my notion of the darkness which overhangs the
region of eleven. In reality it is not a cloud at all, but a darkness.

"My sister, a married lady, thirty-eight years of age, sees numerals
much as I do, but very indistinctly. She cannot draw a figure which
is not by far too distinct."

Most of those who associate colours with numerals do so in a vague
way, impossible to convey with truth in a painting. Of the few who
see them with more objectivity, many are unable to paint or are
unwilling to take the trouble required to match the precise colours
of their fancies. A slight error in hue or tint always dissatisfies
them with their work.

Before dismissing the subject of numerals, I would call attention to
a few other associations connected with them. They are often
personified by children, and characters are assigned to them, it may
be on account of the part they play in the multiplication table, or
owing to some fanciful association with their appearance or their
sound. To the minds of some persons the multiplication table appears
dramatised, and any chance group of figures may afford a plot for a
tale. I have collated six full and trustworthy accounts, and find a
curious dissimilarity in the personifications and preferences; thus
the number 3 is described as (1) disliked; (2) a treacherous sneak;
(3) a good old friend; (4) delightful and amusing; (5) a female
companion to 2; (6) a feeble edition of 9. In one point alone do I
find any approach to unanimity, and that is in the respect paid to 12,
as in the following examples:--(1) important and influential;
(2) good and cautious--so good as to be almost noble; (3) a more
beautiful number than 10, from the many multiples that make it
up--in other words, its kindly relations to so many small numbers;
(4) a great love for 12, a large-hearted motherly person because of
the number of little ones that it takes, as it were, under its
protection. The decimal system seemed to me treason against this
motherly 12.--All this concurs with the importance assigned for
other reasons to the number 12 in the Number-Form.

There is no agreement as to the sex of numbers; I myself had
absurdly enough fancied that _of course_ the even numbers would be
taken to be of the male sex, and was surprised to find that they
were not. I mention this as an example of the curious way in which
our minds may be unconsciously prejudiced by the survival of some
forgotten early fancies. I cannot find on inquiring of philologists
any indications of different sexes having been assigned in any
language to different numbers.

Mr. Hershon has published an analysis of the Talmud, on the odd
principle of indexing the various passages according to the number
they may happen to contain; thus such a phrase as "there were three
men who," etc., would be entered under the number 3. I cannot find
any particular preferences given there to especial numbers; even 7
occurs less often than 1, 2, 3, 4, and 10. Their respective
frequency being 47, 54, 53, 64, 54, 51; 12 occurs only sixteen times.
Gamblers have not unfrequently the silliest ideas concerning numbers,
their heads being filled with notions about lucky figures and
beautiful combinations of them. There is a very amusing chapter in
_Rome Contemporaine_, by E. About, in which he speaks of this in
connection with the rage for lottery tickets.




COLOUR ASSOCIATIONS.

Numerals are occasionally seen in Arabic or other figures, not
disposed in any particular Form, but coloured. An instance of this
is represented in Fig. 69 towards the middle part of the column, but
as I shall have shortly to enter at length into the colour
associations of the author, I will pass over this portion of them,
and will quote in preference from the letter of another correspondent.

Baron von Osten Sacken, of whom I have already spoken, writes:--

"The localisation of numerals, peculiar to certain persons, is
foreign to me. In my mind's eye the figures appear _in front_ of me,
within a limited space. My peculiarity, however, consists in the
fact that the numerals from 1 to 9 are differently coloured; (1)
black, (2) yellow, (3) pale brick red, (4) brown, (5) blackish gray,
(6) reddish brown, (7) green, (8) bluish, (9) reddish brown,
somewhat like 6. These colours appear very distinctly when I think
of these figures separately; in compound figures they become less
apparent. But the most remarkable manifestation of these colours
appears in my recollections of chronology. When I think of the
events of a given century they invariably appear to me on a
background coloured like the principal figure in the dates of that
century; thus events of the eighteenth century invariably appear to
me on a greenish ground, from the colour of the figure 7. This habit
clings to me most tenaciously, and the only hypothesis I can form
about its origin is the following:--My tutor, when I was ten to
twelve years old, taught me chronology by means of a diagram on
which the centuries were represented by squares, subdivided in 100
smaller squares; the squares representing centuries had _narrow
coloured borders_; it may be that in this way the recollection of
certain figures became associated with certain colours. I venture
this explanation without attaching too much importance to it, because
it seems to me that if it was true, my _direct_ recollection of those
coloured borders would have been stronger than it is; still, the
strong association of my chronology with colour seems to plead in
favour of that explanation."

Figs. 66, 67. These two are selected out of a large collection
of coloured Forms in which the months of the year are visualised.
They will illustrate the gorgeousness of the mental imagery of
some favoured persons. Of these Fig. 66 is by the wife of an able
London physician, and Fig. 67 is by Mrs. Kempe Welch, whose sister,
Miss Bevington, a well-known and thoughtful writer, also sees
coloured imagery in connection with dates. This Fig. 67 was one
of my test cases, repeated after the lapse of two years, and quite
satisfactorily. The first communication was a descriptive account,
partly in writing, partly by word of mouth; the second, on my asking
for it, was a picture which agreed perfectly with the description,
and explained much that I had not understood at the time. The small
size of the Fig. in the Plate makes it impossible to do justice to
the picture, which is elaborate and on a large scale, with a
perspective of similar hills stretching away to the far distance,
and each standing for a separate year. She writes:--

"It is rather difficult to give it fully without making it too
definite; on each side there is a total blank."

The instantaneous association of colour with sound characterises a
small percentage of adults, and it appears to be rather common,
though in an ill-developed degree, among children. I can here appeal
not only to my own collection of facts, but to those of others, for
the subject has latterly excited some interest in Germany. The first
widely known case was that of the brothers Nussbaumer, published in
1873 by Professor Bruhl of Vienna, of which the English reader will
find an account in the last volume of Lewis's _Problems of Life and
Mind_ (p. 280). Since then many occasional notices of similar
associations have appeared. A pamphlet containing numerous cases was
published in Leipsic in 1881 by two Swiss investigators, Messrs.
Bleuler and Lehmann.[9] One of the authors had the faculty very
strongly, and the other had not; so they worked conjointly with
advantage. They carefully tabulated the particulars of sixty-two
cases. As my present object is to subordinate details to the general
impression that I wish to convey of the peculiarities of different
minds, I will simply remark--First, that the persistence of the
colour association with sounds is fully as remarkable as that of the
Number-Form with numbers. Secondly, that the vowel sounds chiefly
evoke them. Thirdly, that the seers are invariably most minute in
their description of the precise tint and hue of the colour. They
are never satisfied, for instance, with saying "blue," but will take
a great deal of trouble to express or to match the particular blue
they mean. Fourthly, that no two people agree, or hardly ever do so,
as to the colour they associate with the same sound. Lastly, that
the tendency is very hereditary. The publications just mentioned
absolve me from the necessity of giving many extracts from the
numerous letters I have received, but I am particularly anxious to
bring the brilliancy of these colour associations more vividly
before the reader than is possible by mere description. I have
therefore given the elaborately-coloured diagrams in Plate IV., which
were copied by the artist directly from the original drawings, and
which have been printed by the superimposed impressions of different
colours from different lithographic stones. They have been, on the
whole, very faithfully executed, and will serve as samples of the
most striking cases. Usually the sense of colour is much too vague
to enable the seer to reproduce the various tints so definitely as
those in this Plate. But this is by no means universally the case.

Fig. 68 is an excellent example of the occasional association of
colours with letters. It is by Miss Stones, the head teacher in a
high school for girls, who, as I have already mentioned, obtained
useful information for me, and has contributed several suggestive
remarks of her own. She says:--

"The vowels of the English language always appear to me, when I
think of them, as possessing certain colours, of which I enclose a
diagram. Consonants, when thought of by themselves, are of a
purplish black; but when I think of a whole word, the colour of the
consonants tends towards the colour of the vowels. For example, in
the word 'Tuesday,' when I think of each letter separately, the
consonants are purplish-black, _u_ is a light dove colour, _e_ is a
pale emerald green, and _a_ is yellow; but when I think of the whole
word together, the first part is a light gray-green, and the latter
part yellow. Each word is a distinct whole. I have always associated
the same colours with the same letters, and no effort will change
the colour of one letter, transferring it to another. Thus the word
'red' assumes a light-green tint, while the word 'yellow' is
light-green at the beginning and red at the end. Occasionally, when
uncertain how a word should be spelt, I have considered what colour
it ought to be, and have decided in that way. I believe this has
often been a great help to me in spelling, both in English and
foreign languages. The colour of the letters is never smeared or
blurred in any way. I cannot recall to mind anything that should
have first caused me to associate colours with letters, nor can my
mother remember any alphabet or reading-book coloured in the way I
have described, which I might have used as a child. I do not
associate any idea of colour with musical notes at all, nor with any
of the other senses."

She adds:--

"Perhaps you may be interested in the following account from my
sister of her visual peculiarities: 'When I think of Wednesday I see
a kind of oval flat wash of yellow emerald green; for Tuesday, a
gray sky colour; for Thursday, a brown-red irregular polygon; and a
dull yellow smudge for Friday.'"

[Footnote 9: Zwangmaessige Lichtempfindungen durch Schall und
verwandte Erscheinungen, von E. Bleuler und K. Lehmann. Leipsig, Fues'
Verlag (R. Reisland), 1881.]

The latter quotation is a sample of many that I have; I give it
merely as another instance of hereditary tendency.

I will insert just one description of other coloured letters than
those represented in the Plate. It is from Mrs. H., the married
sister of a well-known man of science, who writes:--

"I do not know how it is with others, but to me the colours of
vowels are so strongly marked that I hardly understand their
appearing of a different colour, or, what is nearly as bad,
colourless to any one. To me they are and always have been, as long
as I have known them, of the following tints:--"

A, pure white, and like china in texture.

E, red, not transparent; vermilion, with china-white would represent
it.

I, light bright yellow; gamboge.

O, black, but transparent; the colour of deep water seen through
thick clear ice.

U, purple.

Y, a dingier colour than I.

"The shorter sounds of the vowels are less vivid and pure in colour.
Consonants are almost or quite colourless to me, though there is
some blackness about M.

"Some association with U in the words blue and purple may account
for that colour, and possibly the E in red may have to do with that
also; but I feel as if they were independent of suggestions of the
kind.

"My first impulse is to say that the association lies solely in the
sound of the vowels, in which connection I certainly feel it the
most strongly; but then the thought of the distinct redness of such
a [printed or written] word as '_great_' shows me that the relation
must be visual as well as aural. The meaning of words is so
unavoidably associated with the sight of them, that I think this
association rather overrides the primitive impression of the colour
of the vowels, and the word '_violet_' reminds me of its proper
colour until I look at the word as a mere collection of letters.

"Of my two daughters, one sees the colours quite differently from
this (A, blue; E, white; I, black; O, whity-brownish; U, opaque brown).
The other is only heterodox on the A and O; A being with her black,
and O white. My sister and I never agreed about these colours, and I
doubt whether my two brothers feel the chromatic force of the vowels
at all."

I give this instance partly on account of the hereditary interest. I
could add cases from at least three different families in which the
heredity is quite as strongly marked.

Fig. 69 fills the whole of the middle column of Plate IV., and
contains specimens from a large series of coloured illustrations,
accompanied by many pages of explanation from a correspondent,
Dr. James Key of Montagu, Cape Colony. The pictures will tell their
own tale sufficiently well. I need only string together a few brief
extracts from his letters, as follows:--

"I confess my inability to understand visualised numerals; it is
otherwise, however, with regard to colour associations with letters.
Ever since childhood these have been distinct and unchanging in my
consciousness; sometimes, although very seldom, I have mentioned them,
to the amazement of my teachers and the scorn of my comrades. A is
brown. I say it most dogmatically, and nothing will ever have the
effect, I am convinced, of making it appear otherwise! I can imagine
no explanation of this association. [He goes into much detail as to
conceivable reasons connected with his childish life to show that
none of these would do.] Shades of brown accompany to my mind the
various degrees of openness in pronouncing A. I have never been
destitute in all my conscious existence of a conviction that E is a
clear, cold, light-gray blue. I remember daubing in colours, when
quite a little child, the picture of a jockey, whose shirt received
a large share of E, as I said to myself while daubing it with grey.
[He thinks that the letter I may possibly be associated with black
because it contains no open space, and O with white because it does.]
The colour of R has been invariably of a copper colour, in which a
swarthy blackness seems to intervene, visually corresponding to the
trilled pronunciation of R. This same appearance exists also in J, X,
and Z."

The upper row of Fig. 69 shows the various shades of brown,
associated with different pronunciations of the letter A, as in
"fame," "can," "charm," and "all" respectively. The second, third
and fourth rows similarly refer to the various pronunciations of the
other vowels. Then follow the letters of the alphabet, grouped
according to the character of the appearance they suggest. After
these come the numerals. Then I give three lines of words such as
they appear to him. The first is my own name, the second is
"London," and the third is "Visualisation." Proceeding conversely,
Dr. Key collected scraps of various patterns of wall paper, and sent
them together with the word that the colour of the several patterns
suggested to him. Specimens of these are shown in the three bottom
lines of the Fig. I have gone through the whole of them with care,
together with his descriptions and reasons, and can quite understand
his meaning, and how exceedingly complex and refined these
associations are. The patterns are to him like words in poetry,
which call up associations that any substituted word of a like
dictionary meaning would fail to do. It would not, for example, be
possible to print words by the use of counters coloured like those
in Fig. 69, because the tint of each influences that of its
neighbours. It must be understood that my remarks, though based on
Dr. Key's diagrams and statements as on a text, do not depend, by
any means, wholly upon them, but on numerous other letters from
various quarters to the same effect. At the same time I should say
that Dr. Key's elaborate drawings and ample explanations, to which I
am totally unable to do justice in a moderate space, are the most
full and striking of any I have received. His illustrations are on a
large scale, and are ingeniously arranged so as to express his
meaning.

Persons who have colour associations are unsparingly critical. To
ordinary individuals one of these accounts seems just as wild and
lunatic as another, but when the account of one seer is submitted to
another seer, who is sure to see the colours in a different way, the
latter is scandalised and almost angry at the heresy of the former.
I submitted this very account of Dr. Key to a lady, the wife of an
ex-governor of one of the most important British possessions, who
has vivid colour associations of her own, and who, I had some reason
to think, might have personal acquaintance with the locality where
Dr. Key lives. She could not comprehend his account at all, his
colours were so entirely different to those that she herself saw.

I have now completed as much as I propose to say about the quaint
phenomena of Visualised Forms of numbers and of dates, and of
coloured associations with letters. I shall not extend my remarks to
such subjects as a musician hearing mental music, of which I have
many cases, nor to fancies concerning the other senses, as none of
these are so noteworthy. I am conscious that the reader may desire
even more assurance of the trustworthiness of the accounts I have
given than the space now at my disposal admits, or than I could
otherwise afford without wearisome iteration of the same tale, by
multiplying extracts from my large store of material. I feel, too,
that it may seem ungracious to many obliging correspondents not to
have made more evident use of what they have sent than my few and
brief notices permit. Still their end and mine will have been gained,
if these remarks and illustrations succeed in leaving a just
impression of the vast variety of mental constitution that exists in
the world, and how impossible it is for one man to lay his mind
strictly alongside that of another, except in the rare instances of
close hereditary resemblance.




VISIONARIES.

In the course of my inquiries into visual memory, I was greatly
struck by the frequency of the replies in which my informants
described themselves as subject to "visions." Those of whom I speak
were sane and healthy, but were subject notwithstanding to visual
presentations, for which they could not account, and which in a few
cases reached the level of hallucinations. This unexpected
prevalence of a visionary tendency among persons who form a part of
ordinary society seems to me suggestive and well worthy of being put
on record. The images described by different persons varied greatly
in distinctness, some were so faint and evanescent as to appear
unworthy of serious notice; others left a deep impression, and
others again were so vivid as actually to deceive the judgment. All
of these belong to the same category, and it is the assurance of
their common origin that affords justification for directing
scientific attention to what many may be inclined to contemptuously
disregard as the silly vagaries of vacant minds.

The lowest order of phenomena that admit of being classed as visions
are the "Number-Forms" to which I have just drawn attention. They
are in each case absolutely unchangable, except through a gradual
development in complexity. Their diversity is endless, and the
Number-Forms of different persons are mutually unintelligible. These
strange "visions," for such they must be called, are extremely vivid
in some cases, but are almost incredible to the vast majority of
mankind, who would set them down as fantastic nonsense; nevertheless,
they are familiar parts of the mental furniture of the rest, in
whose imaginations they have been unconsciously formed, and where
they remain unmodified and unmodifiable by teaching. I have received
many touching accounts of their childish experiences from persons
who see the Number-Forms, and other curious visions of which I have
spoken or shall speak. As is the case with the colour-blind, so with
these seers. They imagined at first that everybody else had the same
way of regarding things as themselves. Then they betrayed their
peculiarities by some chance remark that called forth a stare of
surprise, followed by ridicule and a sharp scolding for their
silliness, so that the poor little things shrank back into themselves,
and never ventured again to allude to their inner world. I will
quote just one of many similar letters as a sample. I received it,
together with much interesting information, immediately after a
lecture I gave to the British Association at Swansea, in which I had
occasion to speak of the Number-Forms. The writer says:--

"I had no idea for many years that every one did not imagine numbers
in the same positions as those in which they appear to me. One
unfortunate day I spoke of it, and was sharply rebuked for my
absurdity. Being a very sensitive child I felt this acutely, but
nothing ever shook my belief that, absurd or not, I always saw
numbers in this particular way. I began to be ashamed of what I
considered a peculiarity, and to imagine myself, from this and
various other mental beliefs and states, as somewhat isolated and
peculiar. At your lecture the other night, though I am now over
twenty-nine, the memory of my childish misery at the dread of being
peculiar came over me so strongly that I felt I must thank you for
proving that, in this particular at any rate, my case is most common."

The next sort of vision that flashes unaccountably into existence is
the instant association in some persons of colour with sound, which
was spoken of in the last chapter, and on which I need not say more
now.

A third curious and abiding fantasy of certain persons is invariably
to connect visualised pictures with words, the same picture to the
same word. These are perceived by many in a vague, fleeting, and
variable way, but to a few they appear strangely vivid and permanent.
I have collected many cases of this peculiarity, and am much
indebted to the authoress, Mrs. Haweis, who sees these pictures, for
her kindness in sketching some of them for me, and for permitting me
to use her name in guarantee of their genuineness. She says:--

"Printed words have always had faces to me; they had definite
expressions, and certain faces made me think of certain words. The
words had _no_ connection with these except sometimes by accident.
The instances I give are few and ridiculous. When I think of the
word Beast, it has a face something like a gargoyle. The word Green
has also a gargoyle face, with the addition of big teeth. The word
Blue blinks and looks silly, and turns to the right. The word
Attention has the eyes greatly turned to the left. It is difficult
to draw them properly because, like Alice's 'Cheshire cat,' which at
times became a grin without a cat, these faces have expression
without features. The expression of course" [note the _naive_ phrase
"of course."--F.G.] "depends greatly on those of the letters, which
have likewise their faces and figures. All the little a's turn their
eyes to the left, this determines the eyes of Attention. Ant, however,
looks a little down. Of course these faces are endless as words are,
and it makes my head ache to retain them long enough to draw."

Some of the figures are very quaint. Thus the interrogation
"what?" always excites the idea of a fat man cracking a long whip.
They are not the capricious creations of the fancy of the moment,
but are the regular concomitants of the words, and have been so as
far back as the memory is able to recall.

When in perfect darkness, if the field of view be carefully watched,
many persons will find a perpetual series of changes to be going on
automatically and wastefully in it. I have much evidence of this. I
will give my own experience the first, which is striking to me,
because I am very unimpressionable in these matters. I visualise
with effort; I am peculiarly inapt to see "after-images," "phosphenes,"
"light-dust," and other phenomena due to weak sight or sensitiveness;
and, again, before I thought of carefully trying, I should have
emphatically declared that my field of view in the dark was
essentially of a uniform black, subject to an occasional
light-purple cloudiness and other small variations. Now, however,
after habituating myself to examine it with the same sort of strain
that one tries to decipher a signpost in the dark, I have found out
that this is by no means the case, but that a kaleidoscopic change
of patterns and forms is continually going on, but they are too
fugitive and elaborate for me to draw with any approach to truth. I
am astonished at their variety, and cannot guess in the remotest
degree the cause of them. They disappear out of sight and memory the
instant I begin to think about anything, and it is curious to me
that they should often be so certainly present and yet be habitually
overlooked. If they were more vivid, the case would be very different,
and it is most easily conceivable that some very slight
physiological change, short of a really morbid character, would
enhance their vividness. My own deficiencies, however, are well
supplied by other drawings in my possession. These are by the Rev.
George Henslow, whose visions are far more vivid than mine. His
experiences are not unlike those of Goethe, who said, in an
often-quoted passage, that whenever he bent his head and closed his
eyes and thought of a rose, a sort of rosette made its appearance,
which would not keep its shape steady for a moment, but unfolded
from within, throwing out a succession of petals, mostly red but
sometimes green, and that it continued to do so without change in
brightness and without causing him any fatigue so long as he cared to
watch it. Mr. Henslow, when he shuts his eyes and waits, is sure in
a short time to see before him the clear image of some object or
other, but usually not quite natural in its shape. It then begins to
change from one form to another, in his case also for as long a time
as he cares to watch it. Mr. Henslow has zealously made repeated
experiments on himself, and has drawn what he sees. He has also tried
how far he is able to mould the visions according to his will. In
one case, after much effort, he contrived to bring the imagery back
to its starting-point, and thereby to form what he terms a "visual
cycle." The following account is extracted and condensed from his
very interesting letter, and will explain the illustrations copied
from his drawings that are given in Plate IV.

Fig. 70. The first image that spontaneously presented itself was a
cross-bow (1); this was immediately provided with an arrow (2),
remarkable for its pronounced barb and superabundance of feathering.
Some person, but too indistinct to recognise much more of him than
the hands, appeared to shoot the arrow from the bow. The single
arrow was then accompanied by a flight of arrows from right to left,
which completely occupied the field of vision. These changed into
falling stars, then into flakes of a heavy snowstorm; the ground
gradually appeared as a sheet of snow where previously there had
been vacant space. Then a well-known rectory, fish-ponds, walls, etc.,
all covered with snow, came into view most vividly and clearly
defined. This somehow suggested another view, impressed on his mind
in childhood, of a spring morning, brilliant sun, and a bed of red
tulips: the tulips gradually vanished except one, which appeared now
to be isolated and to stand in the usual point of sight. It was a
single tulip, but became double. The petals then fell off rapidly in
a continuous series until there was nothing left but the pistil
(3), but (as is almost invariably the case with his objects) that
part was greatly exaggerated. The stigmas then changed into three
branching brown horns (4); then into a knob (5), while the stalk
changed into a stick. A slight bend in it seems to have suggested a
centre-bit (6); this passed into a sort of pin passing through a
metal plate (7), this again into a lock (8), and afterwards into a
nondescript shape (9), distantly suggestive of the original cross-bow.
Here Mr. Henslow endeavoured to force his will upon the visions, and
to reproduce the cross-bow, but the first attempt was an utter
failure. The figure changed into a leather strap with loops (10), but
while he still endeavoured to change it into a bow the strap broke,
the two ends were separated, but it happened that an imaginary
string connected them (11). This was the first concession of his
automatic chain of thoughts to his will. By a continued effort the
bow came (12), and then no difficulty was felt in converting it into
the cross-bow, and thus returning to the starting-point. Fig. 71.
Mr. Henslow writes:--

"Though I can usually summon up any object thought of, it not only
is somewhat different from the real thing, but it rapidly changes.
The changes are in many cases clearly due to a suggestiveness in the
article of something else, but not always so, as in some cases
hereafter described. It is not at ail necessary to think of any
particular object at first, as something is sure to come
spontaneously within a minute or two. Some object having once
appeared, the automatism of the brain will rapidly induce the series
of changes. The images are sometimes very numerous, and very rapid
in succession: very frequently of great beauty and highly brilliant.
Cut glass (far more elaborate than I am conscious of ever having seen),
highly chased gold and silver filigree ornaments; gold and silver
flower-stands, etc.; elaborate coloured patterns of carpets in
brilliant tints are not uncommon.

"Another peculiarity resides in the extreme restlessness of my
visual objects. It is often very difficult to keep them still, as
well as from changing in character. They will rapidly oscillate or
else rotate to a most perplexing degree, and when the characters
change at the same time a critical examination is almost impossible.
When the process is in full activity, I feel as if I were a mere
spectator at a diorama of a very eccentric kind, and was in no way
concerned with the getting up of the performance.

"When a succession of images has been passing, I sometimes _determine_
to introduce an object, say a watch. Very often it is next to
impossible to succeed. There is an evident struggle. The watch,
pure and simple, will not come; but some hybrid structure
appears--something round, perhaps--but it lapses into a warming-pan
or other unexpected object.

"This practice has brought to my mind very clearly the distinction
between at least one form of automatism of the brain and volition;
but the strength of the former is enormous, for the visual objects,
when in full career of the change, are _imperative_ in their refusal
to be interfered with.

"I will now describe the cases illustrated. Fig. 71. I thought of a
gun. The _stock_ came into view, the metal plate on the end very
distinct towards the left (1). The wood was elaborately carved. I
cannot recall the pattern. As I scrutinised it, the stock oscillated
up and down, and _crumpled up_. The metallic plate sank inwards: and
the stock contracted so that it looked not unlike a tuning-fork
(2). I gave up the stock and proceeded cautiously to examine the lock.
I got it well into view, but no more of the gun. It turned out to be
an old-fashioned flint-lock. It immediately began to nod backwards
and forwards in a manner suggestive of the beak of a bird pecking.
Consequently it forthwith became converted into the head of a bird
with a long curved beak, the knob on the lock (3) becoming the head
of the bird. I then looked to the right expecting to find the barrel,
but the snout of a saw-fish with the tip _distinctly_ broken off
appeared instead. I had not thought either of a _flint_-lock or of a
saw-fish: both came spontaneously.

"Fig. 72. I have several times thought of a rosebud, as Goethe is
said to have been able to see one at will, and to observe it expand.
The following are some of the results:--The bud appeared
unexpectedly a moss rosebud. Its only abnormal appearance was the
inordinately elongated sepals (1). I tried to _force_ it to expand.
It enlarged but only partially opened (2), when all of a sudden it
burst open and the petals became reflexed (3).[10]

"Fig. 73. The spontaneous appearance of a poppy capsule (1)
dehiscing as usual by 'pores,' but with inordinately long and
arching valves over the pores. These valves were eminently
suggestive of hooded flowers. Hence they changed to a whorl of
_salvias_ (2). Each blossom now gyrated rapidly in a vertical plane.
Concentrating observation on _one_ rotating flower, it became a
'rotating haze,' as the rapid motion rendered the flower totally
indistinct. The 'haze' now shaped itself into a circle of moss with
a deep funnel-like cavity. This was suggestive of a bird's nest. It
became lined with _hair_, but the nest was a _deep_, pointed cavity.
A nest was suggestive of eggs. Hence a series appeared (4); the two
rows meeting in one at the apex appears to have arisen from the
_perspective_ view of the nest. The eggs all disappeared but one
(5), which increased in size; the bright point of light now shone
with great intensity like a star; then it gradually grew dimmer and
dimmer till it disappeared into the usual hazy obscurity into which
all [my] visual objects ultimately vanish."

I have a sufficient variety of cases to prove the continuity between
all the forms of visualisation, beginning with an almost total
absence of it, and ending with a complete hallucination. The
continuity is, however, not simply that of varying degrees of
intensity, but of variations in the character of the process itself,
so that it is by no means uncommon to find two very different forms
of it concurrent in the same person. There are some who visualise
well, and who also are seers of visions, who declare that the vision
is not a vivid visualisation, but altogether a different phenomenon.
In short, if we please to call all sensations due to external
impressions "_direct"_ and all others "_induced_" then there are
many channels through which the "_induction_" of the latter may
take place, and the channel of ordinary visualisation in the persons
just mentioned is different from that through which their visions
arise.

The following is a good instance of this condition. A friend writes:
--

"These visions often appear with startling vividness, and so far
from depending on any voluntary effort of the mind, [10] they remain
when I often wish them very much to depart, and no effort of the
imagination can call them up. I lately saw a framed portrait of a
face which seemed more lovely than any painting I have ever seen,
and again I often see fine landscapes which bear no resemblance to
any scenery I have ever looked upon. I find it difficult to define
the difference between a waking vision and a mental image, although
the difference is very apparent to myself. I think I can do it best
in this way. If you go into a theatre and look at a scene--say of a
forest by moonlight--at the back part of the stage you see every
object distinctly and sufficiently illuminated (being thus unlike a
mere act of memory), but it is nevertheless vague and shadowy, and
you might have difficulty in telling afterwards all the objects you
have seen. This resembles a mental image in point of clearness. The
waking vision is like what one sees in the open street in broad
daylight, when every object is distinctly impressed on the memory.
The two kinds of imagery differ also as regards voluntariness, the
image being entirely subservient to the will, the visions entirely
independent of it. They differ also in point of suddenness, the
images being formed comparatively slowly as memory recalls each
detail, and fading slowly as the mental effort to retain them is
relaxed, the visions appearing and vanishing in an instant. The
waking visions seem quite close, filling as it were the whole head,
while the mental image seems farther away in some far-off recess of
the mind."

[Footnote 10: The details and illustrations of four other
experiments with the image of a rosebud have been given me. They all
vary in detail.]

The number of sane persons who see visions no less distinctly than
this correspondent is much greater than I had any idea of when I
began this inquiry. I have received an interesting sketch of one,
prefaced by a description of it by Mrs. Haweis. She says:--

"All my life long I have had one very constantly-recurring vision, a
sight which came whenever it was dark or darkish, in bed or otherwise.
It is a flight of pink roses floating in a mass from left to right,
and this cloud or mass of roses is presently effaced by a flight of
'sparks' or gold speckles across them. The sparks totter or vibrate
from left to right, but they fly distinctly upwards; they are like
tiny blocks, half gold, half black, rather symmetrically placed
behind each other, and they are always in a hurry to efface the roses;
sometimes they have come at my call, sometimes by surprise, but they
are always equally pleasing. What interests me most is that, when a
child under nine, the flight of roses was light, slow, soft, close
to my eyes, roses so large and brilliant and palpable that I tried to
touch them; the _scent_ was overpowering, the petals perfect, with
leaves peeping here and there, texture and motion all natural. They
would stay a long time before the sparks came, and they occupied a
large area in black space. Then the sparks came slowly flying, and
generally, not always, effaced the roses at once, and every effort
to retain the roses failed. Since an early age the flight of roses
has annually grown smaller, swifter, and farther off, till by the
time I was grown up my vision had become a speck, so instantaneous
that I had hardly time to realise that it was there before the
fading sparks showed that it was past. This is how they still come.
The pleasure of them is past, and it always depresses me to speak of
them, though I do not now, as I did when a child, connect the vision
with any elevated spiritual state. But when I read Tennyson's
_Holy Grail_, I wondered whether anybody else had had my vision,
'Rose-red, with beatings in it.' I may add, I was a London child who
never was in the country but once, and I connect no particular
flowers with that visit. I may almost say that I had never seen a
rose, certainly not a quantity of them together."

A common form of vision is a phantasmagoria, or the appearance of a
crowd of phantoms, sometimes hurrying past like men in a street. It
is occasionally seen in broad daylight, much more often in the dark;
it may be at the instant of putting out the candle, but it generally
comes on when the person is in bed, preparing to sleep, but by no
means yet asleep. I know no less than three men, eminent in the
scientific world, who have these phantasmagoria in one form or
another. It will seem curious, but it is a fact that I know of no
less than five editors of very influential newspapers who experience
these night visitations in a vivid form. Two of them have described
the phenomena very forcibly in print, but anonymously, and two
others have written on cognate experiences.

A near relative of my own saw phantasmagoria very frequently. She
was eminently sane, and of such good constitution that her faculties
were hardly impaired until near her death at ninety. She frequently
described them to me. It gave her amusement during an idle hour to
watch these faces, for their expression was always pleasing, though
never strikingly beautiful. No two faces were ever alike, and no
face ever resembled that of any acquaintance. When she was not well
the faces usually came nearer to her, sometimes almost suffocatingly
close. She never mistook them for reality, although they were very
distinct. This is quite a typical case, similar in most respects to
many others that I have.[1]

A notable proportion of sane persons have had not only visions, but
actual hallucinations of sight, sound, or other sense, at one or
more periods of their lives. I have a considerable packet of
instances contributed by my personal friends, besides a large number
communicated to me by other correspondents. One lady, a
distinguished authoress, who was at the time a little fidgeted, but
in no way overwrought or ill, assured me that she once saw the
principal character of one of her novels glide through the door
straight up to her. It was about the size of a large doll, and it
disappeared as suddenly as it came. Another lady, the daughter of an
eminent musician, often imagines she hears her father playing. The
day she told me of it the incident had again occurred. She was
sitting in her room with her maid, and she asked the maid to open
the door that she might hear the music better. The moment the maid
got up the hallucination disappeared. Again, another lady,
apparently in vigorous health, and belonging to a vigorous family,
told me that during some past months she had been plagued by voices.
The words were at first simple nonsense; then the word "pray" was
frequently repeated; this was followed by some more or less coherent
sentences of little import, and finally the voices left her. In short,
the familiar hallucinations of the insane are to be met with far
more frequently than is commonly supposed, among people moving in
society and in good working health.

I have now nearly done with my summary of facts; it remains to make
a few comments on them.

The weirdness of visions lies in their sudden appearance, in their
vividness while present, and in their sudden departure. An incident
in the Zoological Gardens struck me as a helpful simile. I happened
to walk to the seal-pond at a moment when a sheen rested on the
unbroken surface of the water. After waiting a while I became
suddenly aware of the head of a seal, black, conspicuous, [12] and
motionless, just as though it had always been there, at a spot on
which my eye had rested a moment previously and seen nothing. Again,
after a while my eye wandered, and on its returning to the spot the
seal was gone. The water had closed in silence over its head without
leaving a ripple, and the sheen on the surface of the pond was as
unbroken as when I first reached it. Where did the seal come from,
and whither did it go? This could easily have been answered if the
glare had not obstructed the view of the movements of the animal
under water. As it was, a solitary link in a continuous chain of
actions stood isolated from all the rest. So it is with the visions;
a single stage in a series of mental processes emerges into the
domain of consciousness. All that precedes and follows lies outside
of it, and its character can only be inferred. We see in a general
way that a condition of the presentation of visions lies in the
over-sensitiveness of certain tracks or domains of brain action and
the under-sensitiveness of others, certain stages in a mental
process being represented very vividly in consciousness while the
other stages are unfelt; also that individualism is changed to
dividualism.

[Footnote 12: See some curious correspondence on this subject in
the _St. James' Gazette_, Feb. 10, 15, and 20, 1882.]

I do not recollect seeing it remarked that the ordinary phenomena of
dreaming seem to show that partial sensitiveness is a normal
condition during sleep. They do so because one of the most marked
characteristics of the dreamer is the absence of common sense. He
accepts wildly incongruous visions without the slightest scepticism.
Now common sense consists in the comprehension of a large number of
related circumstances, and implies the simultaneous working of many
parts of the brain. On the other hand, the brain is known to be
imperfectly supplied with blood during sleep, and cannot therefore
be at full work. It is probable enough, from hydraulic analogies,
that imperfect irrigation would lead to partial irrigation, and
therefore to suppression of action in some parts of the brain, and
that this is really the case seems to be proved by the absence of
common sense during dreams.

A convenient distinction is made between hallucinations and illusions.
Hallucinations are defined as appearances wholly due to fancy;
illusions, as fanciful perceptions of objects actually seen. There
is also a hybrid case which depends on fanciful visions fancifully
perceived. The problems we have to consider are, on the one hand,
those connected with "_induced_" vision, and, on the other hand,
those connected with the interpretation of vision, whether the
vision be _direct_ or _induced_.

It is probable that much of what passes for hallucination proper
belongs in reality to the hybrid case, being an illusive
interpretation of some induced visual cloud or blur. I spoke of the
ever-varying patterns in the optical field; these, under some slight
functional change, may become more consciously present, and be
interpreted into fantasmal appearances. Many cases could be adduced
to support this view.

I will begin with illusions. What is the process by which they are
established? There is no simpler way of understanding it than by
trying, as children often do, to see "faces in the fire," and to
carefully watch the way in which they are first caught. Let us call
to mind at the same time the experience of past illnesses, when the
listless gaze wandered over the patterns on the wall-paper and the
shadows of the bed-curtains, and slowly evoked the appearances of
faces and figures that were not easily laid again. The process of
making the faces is so rapid in health that it is difficult to
analyse it without the recollection of what took place more slowly
when we were weakened by illness. The first essential element in
their construction is, I believe, the smallness of the area covered
by the glance at any instant, so that the eye has to travel over a
long track before it has visited every part of the object towards
which the attention is directed generally. It is as with a plough,
that must travel many miles before the whole of a small field can be
tilled, but with this important difference--the plough travels
methodically up and down in parallel furrows; the eye wanders in
devious curves, with abrupt bends, and the direction of its course
at any instant depends on four causes: (1) on the easiest sequence
of muscular motion, speaking in a general sense, (2) on idiosyncrasy,
(3) on the mood, and (4) on the associations current at the moment.
The effect of idiosyncrasy ft excellently illustrated by the
"Number-Forms," where we observe that a very special sharply-defined
track of mental vision is preferred by each individual who sees them.
The influence of the mood of the moment is shown in the curves that
are felt appropriate to the various emotions, as the lank drooping
lines of grief, which make the weeping willow so fit an emblem of it.
In constructing fire-faces it seems to me that the eye in its
wanderings tends to follow a favourite course, and it especially
dwells upon the marks that happen to coincide with that course. It
feels its way, easily diverted by associations based on what has
just been noticed, until at last, by the unconscious practice of a
system of "trial and error," it hits upon a track that will
suit--one that is easily run over and that strings together
accidental marks in a way that happens to form a well-connected
picture. This fancy picture is then dwelt upon; all that is
incongruous with it becomes disregarded, while all deficiencies in
it are supplied by the fantasy. The latest stages of the process
might be represented by a diorama. Three lanterns would converge on
the same screen. The first throws an image of what the imagination
will discard, the second of that which it will retain, the third of
that which it will supply. Turn on the first and second, and the
picture on the screen will be identical with that which fell on the
retina. Shut off the first and turn on the third, and the picture
will be identical with the illusion.

Turner the painter made frequent use of a practice analogous to that
of looking for fire-faces in the burning coals; he was known to give
colours to children to daub in play on paper, while he keenly
watched for suggestive but accidental combinations.

I have myself had frequent experience of the automatic construction
of fantastic figures, through a practice I have somewhat encouraged
for the purpose, of allowing my hand to scribble at its own will,
while I am giving my best attention to what is being said by others,
as at small committees. It is always a surprise to me to see the
result whenever I turn my thoughts on what I have been subconsciously
doing. I can rarely recollect even a few of the steps by which the
drawings were made; they grew piece-meal, with some almost forgotten
notice, from time to time, of the sketch as a whole. I can trace no
likeness between what I draw and the images that present themselves
to me in dreams, and I find that a very trifling accident, such as a
chance dot on the paper, may have great influence on the general
character of any one of these automatic sketches.

Visions, like dreams, are often mere patchworks built up of bits of
recollections. The following is one of these:--

"When passing a shop in Tottenham Court Road, I went in to order a
Dutch cheese, and the proprietor (a bullet-headed man whom I had
never seen before) rolled a cheese on the marble slab of his counter,
asking me if that one would do. I answered 'Yes,' left the shop, and
thought no more of the incident. The following evening, on closing
my eyes, I saw a head detached from the body rolling about slightly
on a white surface. I recognised the face, but could not remember
where I had seen it, and it was only after thinking about it for
some time that I identified it as that of the cheesemonger who had
sold me the cheese on the previous day. I may mention that I have
often seen the man since, and that I found the vision I saw was
exactly like him, although if I had been asked to describe the man
before I saw the vision I should have been unable to do so."

Recollections need not be combined like mosaic work; they may be
blended, on the principle of composite portraiture. I suspect that
the phantasmagoria may be in some part due to blended memories; the
number of possible combinations would be practically endless, and
each combination would give a new face. There would thus be no limit
to the dies in the coinage of the brain.

I have found that the peculiarities of visualisation, such as the
tendency to see Number-Forms, and the still rarer tendency to
associate colour with sound, is strongly hereditary, and I should
infer, what facts seem to confirm, that the tendency to be a seer of
visions is equally so. Under these circumstances we should expect
that it would be unequally developed in different races, and that a
large natural gift of the visionary faculty might become
characteristic not only of certain families, as among the
second-sight seers of Scotland, but of certain races, as that of the
Gipsies.

It happens that the mere acts of fasting, of want of sleep, and of
solitary musing, are severally conducive to visions. I have myself
been told of cases in which persons accidentally long deprived of
food became for a brief time subject to them. One was of a pleasure
party driven out to sea, and not being able to reach the coast till
nightfall, at a place where they got shelter but nothing to eat.
They were mentally at ease and conscious of safety, but all were
troubled with visions that were half dreams and half hallucinations.
The cases of visions following protracted wakefulness are well known,
and I have collected a few of them myself. I have already spoken of
the maddening effect of solitariness: its influence may be inferred
from the recognised advantages of social amusements in the treatment
of the insane. It follows that the spiritual discipline undergone
for purposes of self-control and self-mortification, have also the
incidental effect of producing visions. It is to be expected that
these should often bear a close relation to the prevalent subjects
of thought, and although they may be really no more than the
products of one portion of the brain, which another portion of the
same brain is engaged in contemplating, they often, through error,
receive a religious sanction. This is notably the case among
half-civilised races.

The number of great men who have been once, twice, or more frequently,
subject to hallucinations is considerable. A list, to which it would
be easy to make large additions, is given by Brierre de Boismont
(_Hallucinations_, etc., 1862), from whom I translate the following
account of the star of the first Napoleon, which he heard,
second-hand, from General Rapp:--

"In 1806 General Rapp, on his return from the siege of Dantzic,
having occasion to speak to the Emperor, entered his study without
being announced. He found him so absorbed that his entry was
unperceived. The General seeing the Emperor continue motionless,
thought he might be ill, and purposely made a noise. Napoleon
immediately roused himself, and without any preamble, seizing Rapp
by the arm, said to him, pointing to the sky, 'Look there, up there.'
The General remained silent, but on being asked a second time, he
answered that he perceived nothing. 'What!' replied the Emperor,
'you do not see it? It is my star, it is before you, brilliant;'
then animating by degrees, he cried out, 'it has never abandoned me,
I see it on all great occasions, it commands me to go forward, and
it is a constant sign of good fortune to me.'"

Napoleon was no doubt a consummate actor, ready and unscrupulous in
imposing on others, but I see no reason to distrust the genuineness
of this particular outburst, seeing that it is not the only instance
of his referring to the guidance of his star, as a literal vision
and not as a mere phrase, and that his belief in destiny was
notorious.

It appears that stars of this kind, so frequently spoken of in
history, and so well known as a metaphor in language, are a common
hallucination of the insane. Brierre de Boismont has a chapter on
the stars of great men. I cannot doubt that visions of this
description were in some cases the basis of that firm belief in
astrology, which not a few persons of eminence formerly entertained.

The hallucinations of great men may be accounted for in part by
their sharing a tendency which we have seen to be not uncommon in
the human race, and which, if it happens to be natural to them, is
liable to be developed in their overwrought brains by the isolation
of their lives. A man in the position of the first Napoleon could
have no intimate associates; a great philosopher who explores ways
of thought far ahead of his contemporaries must have an inner world
in which he passes long and solitary hours. Great men may be even
indebted to touches of madness for their greatness; the ideas by
which they are haunted, and to whose pursuit they devote themselves,
and by which they rise to eminence, having much in common with the
monomania of insanity. Striking instances of great visionaries may
be mentioned, who had almost beyond doubt those very nervous seizures
with which the tendency to hallucinations is intimately connected.
To take a single instance, Socrates, whose _daimon_ was an audible
not a visual appearance, was, as has been often pointed out, subject
to cataleptic seizure, standing all night through in a rigid attitude.

It is remarkable how largely the visionary temperament has
manifested itself in certain periods of history and epochs of
national life. My interpretation of the matter, to a certain extent,
is this--That the visionary tendency is much more common among sane
people than is generally suspected. In early life, it seems to be a
hard lesson to an imaginative child to distinguish between the real
and visionary world. If the fantasies are habitually laughed at and
otherwise discouraged, the child soon acquires the power of
distinguishing them; any incongruity or nonconformity is quickly
noted, the visions are found out and discredited, and are no further
attended to. In this way the natural tendency to see them is
blunted by repression. Therefore, when popular opinion is of a
matter-of-fact kind, the seers of visions keep quiet; they do not
like to be thought fanciful or mad, and they hide their experiences,
which only come to light through inquiries such as these that I have
been making. But let the tide of opinion change and grow favourable
to supernaturalism, then the seers of visions come to the front. The
faintly-perceived fantasies of ordinary persons become invested by
the authority of reverend men with a claim to serious regard; they
are consequently attended to and encouraged, and they increase in
definition through being habitually dwelt upon. We need not suppose
that a faculty previously non-existent has been suddenly evoked, but
that a faculty long smothered by many in secret has been suddenly
allowed freedom to express itself, and to run into extravagance
owing to the removal of reasonable safeguards.




NURTURE AND NATURE.

Man is so educable an animal that it is difficult to distinguish
between that part of his character which has been acquired through
education and circumstance, and that which was in the original grain
of his constitution. His character is exceedingly complex, even in
members of the simplest and purest savage race; much more is it so in
civilised races, who have long since been exempted from the full
rigour of natural selection, and have become more mongrel in their
breed than any other animal on the face of the earth. Different
aspects of the multifarious character of man respond to different
calls from without, so that the same individual, and, much more, the
same race, may behave very differently at different epochs. There
may have been no fundamental change of character, but a different
phase or mood of it may have been evoked by special circumstances,
or those persons in whom that mood is naturally dominant may through
some accident have the opportunity of acting for the time as
representatives of the race. The same nation may be seized by a
military fervour at one period, and by a commercial one at another;
they may be humbly submissive to a monarch, or become outrageous
republicans. The love of art, gaiety, adventure, science, religion
may be severally paramount at different times.

One of the most notable changes that can come over a nation is from
a state corresponding to that of our past dark ages into one like
that of the Renaissance. In the first case the minds of men are
wholly taken up with routine work, and in copying what their
predecessors have done; they degrade into servile imitators and
submissive slaves to the past. In the second case, some circumstance
or idea has finally discredited the authorities that impeded
intellectual growth, and has unexpectedly revealed new possibilities.
Then the mind of the nation is set free, a direction of research is
given to it, and all the exploratory and hunting instincts are
awakened. These sudden eras of great intellectual progress cannot be
due to any alteration in the natural faculties of the race, because
there has not been time for that, but to their being directed in
productive channels. Most of the leisure of the men of every nation
is spent in rounds of reiterated actions; if it could be spent in
continuous advance along new lines of research in unexplored regions,
vast progress would be sure to be made. It has been the privilege of
this generation to have had fresh fields of research pointed out to
them by Darwin, and to have undergone a new intellectual birth under
the inspiration of his fertile genius.

A pure love of change, acting according to some law of contrast as
yet imperfectly understood, especially characterises civilised man.
After a long continuance of one mood he wants to throw himself into
another for the pleasure of setting faculties into action that have
been long disused, but not yet paralysed by disuse, and which have
become fidgety for employment. He has so many opportunities for
procuring change, and has so complex a nature that he easily learns
to neglect a more deeply-seated feeling that innovation is wicked,
and which is manifest in children and barbarians. To a civilised man
the varied interests of civilisation are temptations in as many
directions; changes in dress and appliances of all kinds are
comparatively inexpensive to him owing to the cheapness of
manufactures and their variety; change of scene is easy from the
conveniences of locomotion. But a barbarian has none of these
facilities: his interests are few; his dress, such as it is, is
intended to stand the wear and tear of years, and all weathers; it
is relatively very costly, and is an investment, one may say, of his
capital rather than of his income; the invention of his people is
sluggish, and their arts are few, consequently he is perforce taught
to be conservative, his ideas are fixed, and he becomes scandalised
even at the suggestion of change.

The difficulty of indulging in variety is incomparably greater among
the rest of the animal world. If a pea-hen should take it into her
head that bars would be prettier than eyes in the tail of her spouse,
she could not possibly get what she wanted. It would require
hundreds of generations in which the pea-hens generally concurred in
the same view before sexual selection could effect the desired
alteration. The feminine delight of indulging her caprice in matters
of ornament is a luxury denied to the females of the brute world,
and the law that rules changes in taste, if studied at all, can only
be ascertained by observing the alternations of fashion in civilised
communities.

There are long sequences of changes in character, which, like the
tunes of a musical snuff-box, are regulated by internal mechanism.
They are such as those of Shakespeare's "Seven Ages," and others due
to the progress of various diseases. The lives of birds are
characterised by long chains of these periodic sequences. They are
mostly mute in winter, after that they begin to sing; some species
are seized in the early part of the year with so strong a passion
for migrating that if confined in a cage they will beat themselves
to death against its bars; then follow courtship and pairing,
accompanied by an access of ferocity among the males and severe
fighting for the females. Next an impulse seizes them to build nests,
then a desire for incubation, then one for the feeding of their young.
After this a newly-arisen tendency to gregariousness groups them
into large flocks, and finally they fly away to the place whence they
came, goaded by a similar instinct to that which drove them forth a
few months previously. These remarkable changes are mainly due to
the conditions of their natures, because they persist with more or
less regularity under altered circumstances. Nevertheless, they are
not wholly independent of circumstance, because the period of
migration, though nearly coincident in successive years, is modified
to some small extent by the weather and condition of the particular
year.

The interaction of nature and circumstance is very close, and it is
impossible to separate them with precision. Nurture acts before birth,
during every stage of embryonic and pre-embryonic existence, causing
the potential faculties at the time of birth to be in some degree
the effect of nurture. We need not, however, be hypercritical about
distinctions; we know that the bulk of the respective provinces of
nature and nurture are totally different, although the frontier
between them may be uncertain, and we are perfectly justified in
attempting to appraise their relative importance.

I shall begin with describing some of the principal influences that
may safely be ascribed to education or other circumstances, all of
which I include under the comprehensive term of Nurture.




ASSOCIATIONS.

The furniture of a man's mind chiefly consists of his recollections
and the bonds that unite them. As all this is the fruit of experience,
it must differ greatly in different minds according to their
individual experiences. I have endeavoured to take stock of my own
mental furniture in the way described in the next chapter, in which
it will be seen how large a part consists of childish recollections,
testifying to the permanent effect of many of the results of early
education. The same fact has been strongly brought out by the
replies from correspondents whom I had questioned on their mental
imagery. It was frequently stated that the mental image invariably
evoked by certain words was some event of childish experience or
fancy. Thus one correspondent, of no mean literary and philosophical
power, recollects the left hand by a mental reference to the
rocking-horse which always stood by the side of the nursery wall
with its head in the same direction, and had to be mounted from the
side next the wall. Another, a politician, historian, and scholar,
refers all his dates to the mental image of a nursery diagram of the
history of the world, which has since developed huge bosses to
support his later acquired information.

Our abstract ideas being mostly drawn from external experiences,
their character also must depend upon the events of our individual
histories. For example, the spoken words house and home must awaken
ideas derived from the houses and the homes with which the hearer is,
in one way or other, acquainted, and these could not be the same to
persons of various social positions and places of residence. The
character of our abstract ideas, therefore, depends, to a
considerable degree, on our nurture.

I doubt, however, whether "abstract idea" is a correct phrase in
many of the cases in which it is used, and whether "cumulative idea"
would not be more appropriate. The ideal faces obtained by the
method of composite portraiture appear to have a great deal in
common with these so-called abstract ideas. The composite portraits
consist, as was explained, of numerous superimposed pictures,
forming a cumulative result in which the features that are common to
all the likenesses are clearly seen; those that are common to a few
are relatively faint and are more or less overlooked, while those
that are peculiar to single individuals leave no sensible trace at
all.

This analogy, which I pointed out in a Memoir on Generic Images,
[11] has been extended and confirmed by subsequent experience of the
process. One objection to my view was that our so-called
generalisations are commonly no more than representative cases, our
recollections being apt to be unduly influenced by particular events,
and not by the totality of what we have seen; that the reason why
some one recollection has prevailed is that the case was sharply
defined, or had something unusual about it, or that our frame of
mind was at the time of observation susceptible to that particular
kind of impression. I have had exactly the same difficulties with
the composites. If one of the individual portraits has sharp outlines,
or if it is unlike the rest, or if the illumination is temporarily
strong, it will assert itself unduly in the result. The cases seem
to me exactly analogous. I get over my photographic difficulty very
easily by throwing the sharp portrait a little out of focus, by
eliminating such portraits as have exceptional features, and by
toning down the illumination to a standard intensity.

[Footnote 11: "Generic Images," _Proc. Royal Institute_, Friday,
April 25, 1879, partly reprinted in the Appendix.]




PSYCHOMETRIC EXPERIMENTS.

When we attempt to trace the first steps in each operation of our
minds, we are usually baulked by the difficulty of keeping watch,
without embarrassing the freedom of its action. The difficulty is
much more than the common and well-known one of attending to two
things at once. It is especially due to the fact that the elementary
operations of the mind are exceedingly faint and evanescent, and
that it requires the utmost painstaking to watch them properly. It
would seem impossible to give the required attention to the
processes of thought, and yet to think as freely as if the mind had
been in no way preoccupied. The peculiarity of the experiments I am
about to describe is that I have succeeded in evading this difficulty.
My method consists in allowing the mind to play freely for a very
brief period, until a couple or so of ideas have passed through it,
and then, while the traces or echoes of those ideas are still
lingering in the brain, to turn the attention upon them with a
sudden and complete awakening; to arrest, to scrutinise them, and to
record their exact appearance. Afterwards I collate the records at
leisure, and discuss them, and draw conclusions. It must be
understood that the second of the two ideas was never derived from
the first, but always directly from the original object. This was
ensured by absolutely withstanding all temptation to reverie. I do
not mean that the first idea was of necessity a simple elementary
thought; sometimes it was a glance down a familiar line of
associations, sometimes it was a well-remembered mental attitude or
mode of feeling, but I mean that it was never so far indulged in as
to displace the object that had suggested it from being the primary
topic of attention.

I must add, that I found the experiments to be extremely trying and
irksome, and that it required much resolution to go through with them,
using the scrupulous care they demanded. Nevertheless the results
well repaid the trouble. They gave me an interesting and unexpected
view of the number of the operations of the mind, and of the obscure
depths in which they took place, of which I had been little
conscious before. The general impression they have left upon me is
like that which many of us have experienced when the basement of our
house happens to be under thorough sanitary repairs, and we realise
for the first time the complex system of drains and gas and water
pipes, flues, bell-wires, and so forth, upon which our comfort
depends, but which are usually hidden out of sight, and with whose
existence, so long as they acted well, we had never troubled
ourselves.

The first experiments I made were imperfect, but sufficient to
inspire me with keen interest in the matter, and suggested the form
of procedure that I have already partly described. My first
experiments were these. On several occasions, but notably on one
when I felt myself unusually capable of the kind of effort required,
I walked leisurely along Pall Mall, a distance of 450 yards, during
which time I scrutinised with attention every successive object that
caught my eyes, and I allowed my attention to rest on it until one
or two thoughts had arisen through direct association with that
object; then I took very brief mental note of them, and passed on to
the next object. I never allowed my mind to ramble. The number of
objects viewed was, I think, about 300, for I had subsequently
repeated the same walk under similar conditions and endeavoured to
estimate their number, with that result. It was impossible for me to
recall in other than the vaguest way the numerous ideas that had
passed through my mind; but of this, at least, I am sure, that
samples of my whole life had passed before me, that many bygone
incidents, which I never suspected to have formed part of my stock
of thoughts, had been glanced at as objects too familiar to awaken
the attention. I saw at once that the brain was vastly more active
than I had previously believed it to be, and I was perfectly amazed
at the unexpected width of the field of its everyday operations.
After an interval of some days, during which I kept my mind from
dwelling on my first experiences, in order that it might retain as
much freshness as possible for a second experiment, I repeated the
walk, and was struck just as much as before by the variety of the
ideas that presented themselves, and the number of events to which
they referred, about which I had never consciously occupied myself
of late years. But my admiration at the activity of the mind was
seriously diminished by another observation which I then made, namely,
that there had been a very great deal of repetition of thought. The
actors in my mental stage were indeed very numerous, but by no means
so numerous as I had imagined. They now seemed to be something like
the actors in theatres where large processions are represented, who
march off one side of the stage, and, going round by the back, come
on again at the other. I accordingly cast about for means of laying
hold of these fleeting thoughts, and, submitting them to statistical
analysis, to find out more about their tendency to repetition and
other matters, and the method I finally adopted was the one already
mentioned. I selected a list of suitable words, and wrote them on
different small sheets of paper. Taking care to dismiss them from my
thoughts when not engaged upon them, and allowing some days to
elapse before I began to use them, I laid one of these sheets with
all due precautions, under a book, but not wholly covered by it, so
that when I leaned forward I could see one of the words, being
previously quite ignorant of what the word would be. Also I held a
small chronograph, which I started by pressing a spring the moment
the word caught my eye, and which stopped of itself the instant I
released the spring; and this I did so soon as about a couple of
ideas in direct association with the word had arisen in my mind. I
found that I could not manage to recollect more than two ideas with
the needed precision, at least not in a general way; but sometimes
several ideas occurred so nearly together that I was able to record
three or even four of them, while sometimes I only managed one. The
second ideas were, as I have already said, never derived from the
first, but always direct from the word itself, for I kept my
attention firmly fixed on the word, and the associated ideas were
seen only by a half glance. When the two ideas had occurred,

I stopped the chronograph and wrote them down, and the time they
occupied. I soon got into the way of doing all this in a very
methodical and automatic manner, keeping the mind perfectly calm and
neutral, but intent and, as it were, at full cock and on hair trigger,
before displaying the word. There was no disturbance occasioned by
thinking of the forthcoming revulsion of the mind the moment before
the chronograph was stopped. My feeling before stopping it was
simply that I had delayed long enough, and this in no way interfered
with the free action of the mind. I found no trouble in ensuring the
complete fairness of the experiment, by using a number of little
precautions, hardly necessary to describe, that practice quickly
suggested, but it was a most repugnant and laborious work, and it
was only by strong self-control that I went through my schedule
according to programme. The list of words that I finally secured was
75 in number, though I began with more. I went through them on four
separate occasions, under very different circumstances, in England
and abroad, and at intervals of about a month. In no case were the
associations governed to any degree worth recording, by remembering
what had occurred to me on previous occasions, for I found that the
process itself had great influence in discharging the memory of what
it had just been engaged in, and I, of course, took care between the
experiments never to let my thoughts revert to the words. The
results seem to me to be as trustworthy as any other statistical
series that has been collected with equal care.

On throwing these results into a common statistical hotch-pot, I
first examined into the rate at which these associated ideas were
formed. It took a total time of 660 seconds to form the 505 ideas;
that is, at about the rate of 50 in a minute, or 3000 in an hour.
This would be miserably slow work in reverie, or wherever the
thought follows the lead of each association that successively
presents itself. In the present case, much time was lost in mentally
taking the word in, owing to the quiet unobtrusive way in which I
found it necessary to bring it into view, so as not to distract the
thoughts. Moreover, a substantive standing by itself is usually the
equivalent of too abstract an idea for us to conceive properly
without delay. Thus it is very difficult to get a quick conception
of the word "carriage," because there are so many different
kinds--two-wheeled, four-wheeled, open and closed, and all of them
in so many different possible positions, that the mind possibly
hesitates amidst an obscure sense of many alternatives that cannot
blend together. But limit the idea to say a laudau, and the mental
association declares itself more quickly. Say a laudau coming down
the street to opposite the door, and an image of many blended
laudaus that have done so forms itself without the least hesitation.

Next, I found that my list of 75 words gone over 4 times, had given
rise to 505 ideas and 13 cases of puzzle, in which nothing
sufficiently definite to note occurred within the brief maximum
period of about 4 seconds, that I allowed myself to any single trial.
Of these 505 only 289 were different The precise proportions in
which the 505 were distributed in quadruplets, triplets, doublets,
or singles, is shown in the uppermost lines of Table I. The same
facts are given under another form in the lower lines of the Table,
which show how the 289 different ideas were distributed in cases of
fourfold, treble, double, or single occurrences.


                            TABLE I.
                      RECURRENT ASSOCIATIONS.
================+=================================================+
Total Number of |                                                 |
  Associations. |                   Occurring in                  |
                |-------------------------------------------------+
                | Quadruplets. | Triplets.  | Doublets. | Singles.|
    505         |     116      |    108     |    114    |   167   |
----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+---------+
 Per cent . 100 |      23      |     21     |     23    |    33   |
================+==============+============+===========+=========+
Total Number of |                                                 |
    Different   |                     Occurring                   |
  Associations. +-------------------------------------------------+
                | Four times.  |Three times.|  Twice.   |  Once.  |
----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+---------+
      289       |      29      |     36     |     57    |   167   |
----------------+--------------+------------+-----------+---------+
 Per cent . 100 |      10      |     12     |     20    |    58   |
================+==============+============+===========+=========+


I was fully prepared to find much iteration in my ideas but had
little expected that out of every hundred words twenty-three would
give rise to exactly the same association in every one of the four
trials; twenty-one to the same association in three out of the four,
and so on, the experiments having been purposely conducted under
very different conditions of time and local circumstances. This shows
much less variety in the mental stock of ideas than I had expected,
and makes us feel that the roadways of our minds are worn into very
deep ruts. I conclude from the proved number of faint and barely
conscious thoughts, and from the proved iteration of them, that the
mind is perpetually travelling over familiar ways without our memory
retaining any impression of its excursions. Its footsteps are so
light and fleeting that it is only by such experiments as I have
described that we can learn anything about them. It is apparently
always engaged in mumbling over its old stores, and if any one of
these is wholly neglected for a while, it is apt to be forgotten,
perhaps irrecoverably. It is by no means the keenness of interest
and of the attention when first observing an object, that fixes it
in the recollection. We pore over the pages of a _Bradshaw_, and
study the trains for some particular journey with the greatest
interest; but the event passes by, and the hours and other facts
which we once so eagerly considered become absolutely forgotten. So
in games of whist, and in a large number of similar instances. As I
understand it, the subject must have a continued living interest in
order to retain an abiding place in the memory. The mind must refer
to it frequently, but whether it does so consciously or
unconsciously is not perhaps a matter of much importance. Otherwise,
as a general rule, the recollection sinks, and appears to be utterly
drowned in the waters of Lethe.

The instances, according to my personal experience, are very rare,
and even those are not very satisfactory, in which some event
recalls a memory that had lain _absolutely_ dormant for many years.
In this very series of experiments a recollection which I thought
had entirely lapsed appeared under no less than three different
aspects on different occasions. It was this: when I was a boy, my
father, who was anxious that I should learn something of physical
science, which was then never taught at school, arranged with the
owner of a large chemist's shop to let me dabble at chemistry for a
few days in his laboratory. I had not thought of this fact, so far
as I was aware, for many years; but in scrutinising the fleeting
associations called up by the various words, I traced two mental
visual images (an alembic and a particular arrangement of tables and
light), and one mental sense of smell (chlorine gas) to that very
laboratory. I recognised that these images appeared familiar to me,
but I had not thought of their origin. No doubt if some strange
conjunction of circumstances had suddenly recalled those three
associations at the same time, with perhaps two or three other
collateral matters which may be still living in my memory, but which
I no not as yet identify, a mental perception of startling vividness
would be the result, and I should have falsely imagined that it had
supernaturally, as it were, started into life from an entire
oblivion extending over many years. Probably many persons would have
registered such a case as evidence that things once perceived can
never wholly vanish from the recollection, but that in the hour
of death, or under some excitement, every event of a past life
may reappear. To this view I entirely dissent. Forgetfulness
appears absolute in the vast majority of cases, and our supposed
recollections of a past life are, I believe, no more than that
of a large number of episodes in it, to be reckoned perhaps in
hundreds of thousands, but certainly not in tens of hundreds of
thousands, that have escaped oblivion. Every one of the fleeting,
half-conscious thoughts that were the subject of my experiments,
admitted of being vivified by keen attention, or by some appropriate
association, but I strongly suspect that ideas which have long since
ceased to fleet through the brain, owing to the absence of current
associations to call them up, disappear wholly. A comparison of old
memories with a newly-met friend of one's boyhood, about the events
we then witnessed together, show how much we had each of us forgotten.
Our recollections do not tally. Actors and incidents that seem to
have been of primary importance in those events to the one have been
utterly forgotten by the other. The recollection of our earlier
years are, in truth, very scanty, as any one will find who tries to
enumerate them.

My associated ideas were for the most part due to my own unshared
experiences, and the list of them would necessarily differ widely
from that which another person would draw up who might repeat my
experiments. Therefore one sees clearly, and I may say, one can see
_measurably_, how impossible it is in a general way for two
grown-up persons to lay their minds side by side together in perfect
accord. The same sentence cannot produce precisely the same effect on
both, and the first quick impressions that any given word in it may
convey, will differ widely in the two minds.

I took pains to determine as far as feasible the dates of my life at
which each of the associated ideas was first attached to the word.
There were 124 cases in which identification was satisfactory, and
they were distributed as in Table II.


                                TABLE  II.
         RELATIVE NUMBER OF ASSOCIATIONS FORMED AT DIFFERENT
                            PERIODS OF LIFE.
==============+==========================================+==============+
Total number  |            Occurring                     | Whose first  |
of different  |------------------------------------------+ formation    |
Associations. |  four    | three    |   twice |   once   | was in       |
              |  times.  | times.   |         |          |              |
     +--------|    +-----|    +-----|   +-----|    +-----|              |
     | per    |    |per  |    |per  |   |per  |    |per  |              |
     | cent.  |    |cent.|    |cent.|   |cent.|    |cent.|              |
     +--------|----+-----+----+-----+---+-----+----+-----+--------------+
  48 |   39   | 12 | 10  | 11 |  9  | 9 |  7  | 16 | 13  | boyhood and  |
     |        |    |     |    |     |   |     |    |     |   youth,     |
     |        |    |     |    |     |   |     |    |     |              |
  57 |   46   | 10 |  8  |  8 |  7  | 6 |  5  | 33 | 26  | subsequent   |
     |        |    |     |    |     |   |     |    |     |   manhood,   |
     |        |    |     |    |     |   |     |    |     |              |
  19 |   15   | -- | --  |  4 |  3  | 1 |  1  | 14 | 11  | quite recent |
     |        |    |     |    |     |   |     |    |     |   events.    |
-----+--------|----+-----+----+-----+---+-----+----+-----+--------------+
 124 |  100   | 22 | 18  | 23 | 19  |16 | 13  | 63 | 50  |  Totals.     |
=====+========+=========================================================+


It will be seen from the Table that out of the 48 earliest
associations no less than 12, or one quarter of them, occurred in
each of the four trials; of the 57 associations first formed in
manhood, 10, or about one-sixth of them, had a similar recurrence,
but as to the 19 other associations first formed in quite recent
times, not one of them occurred in the whole of the four trials.
Hence we may see the greater fixity of the earlier associations, and
might measurably determine the decrease of fixity as the date of
their first formation becomes less remote.

The largeness of the number 33 in the middle entry of the last
column but one, which disconcerts the run of the series, is wholly
due to a visual memory of places seen in manhood. I will not speak
about this now, as I shall have to refer to it farther on. Neglecting,
for the moment, this unique class of occurrences, it will be seen
that one-half of the associations date from the period of life
before leaving college; and it may easily be imagined that many of
these refer to common events in an English education. Nay further, on
looking through the list of all the associations it was easy to see
how they are pervaded by purely English ideas, and especially such
as are prevalent in that stratum of English society in which I was
born and bred, and have subsequently lived. In illustration of this,
I may mention an anecdote of a matter which greatly impressed me at
the time. I was staying in a country house with a very pleasant
party of young and old, including persons whose education and
versatility were certainly not below the social average. One evening
we played at a round game, which consisted in each of us drawing as
absurd a scrawl as he or she could, representing some historical
event; the pictures were then shuffled and passed successively from
hand to hand, every one writing down independently their
interpretation of the picture, as to what the historical event was
that the artist intended to depict by the scrawl. I was astonished
at the sameness of our ideas. Cases like Canute and the waves, the
Babes in the Tower, and the like, were drawn by two and even three
persons at the same time, quite independently of one another,
showing how narrowly we are bound by the fetters of our early
education. If the figures in the above Table may be accepted as
fairly correct for the world generally, it shows, still in a
measurable degree, the large effect of early education in fixing our
associations. It will of course be understood that I make no absurd
profession of being able by these very few experiments to lay down
statistical constants of universal application, but that my principal
object is to show that a large class of mental phenomena, that have
hitherto been too vague to lay hold of, admit of being caught by the
firm grip of genuine statistical inquiry. The results that I have
thus far given are hotch-pot results. It is necessary to sort the
materials somewhat before saying more about them.

After  several trials I  found  that the associated ideas admitted
of being divided into three main groups. First there is the imagined
sound of words, as in verbal quotations or names of persons. This
was frequently a mere parrot-like memory which acted instantaneously
and in a meaningless way, just as a machine might act. In the next
group there was every other kind of sense imagery; the chime of
imagined bells, the shiver of remembered cold, the scent of some
particular locality, and, much  more frequently than all the rest
put together, visual imagery. The last of the three groups contains
what I will venture, for the want of a better name, to call
"histrionic" representations. It includes those cases where I either
act a part in imagination, or see in imagination a part acted, or,
most commonly by far, where I am both spectator and all the actors
at once, in an imaginary mental theatre. Thus I feel a nascent sense
of some muscular action while I simultaneously witness a puppet of
my brain--a part of myself--perform that action, and I assume a
mental attitude appropriate to the occasion. This, in my case, is a
very frequent way of generalising, indeed I rarely feel that I have
secure hold of a general idea until I have translated it somehow
into this form. Thus the word "abasement" presented itself to me, in
one of my experiments, by my mentally placing myself in a pantomimic
attitude of humiliation with half-closed eyes, bowed head, and
uplifted palms, while at the same time I was aware of myself as of a
mental puppet, in that position. This same word will serve to
illustrate the other groups also. It so happened in connection with
"abasement" that the word "David" or "King David" occurred to me on
one occasion in each of three out of the four trials; also that an
accidental misreading, or perhaps the merely punning association of
the words "a basement," brought up on all four occasions the image
of the foundations of a house that the builders had begun upon.

So much for the character of the association; next as to that of the
words. I found, after the experiments were over, that the words were
divisible into three distinct groups. The first contained "abbey,"
"aborigines," "abyss," and others that admitted of being presented
under some mental image. The second group contained "abasement,"
"abhorrence," "ablution," etc., which admitted excellently of
histrionic representation. The third group contained the more
abstract words, such as "afternoon," "ability," "abnormal," which
were variously and imperfectly dealt with by my mind. I give the
results in the upper part of Table III., and, in order to save
trouble, I have reduced them to percentages in the lower lines of
the Table.


                               TABLE III.
    COMPARISON BETWEEN THE QUALITY OF THE WORDS AND THAT OF
         THE IDEAS IN IMMEDIATE ASSOCIATION WITH THEM.
=========================================================================+
 Number  |              |         |          |                    |      |
of words |              | Sense   |Histrionic|   Purely Verbal    |      |
in each  |              |Imagery. |          | Names  | Phrases   | Total|
series.  |              |         |          |   of   |   and     |      |
         |              |         |          |Persons.|Quotations.|      |
         |              |---------+----------+--------+-----------+------+
   26    |"Abbey" series|   46    |    12    |   32   |    17     | 107  |
   20    |"Abasement" " |   25    |    26    |   11   |    17     |  79  |
   29    |"Afternoon" " |   23    |    27    |   16   |    38     | 104  |
   75    |              |         |          |        |           | 290  |
         |              |---------+----------+--------+-----------+------+
         |"Abbey" series|   43    |    11    |   30   |    16     | 100  |
         |"Abasement" " |   32    |    33    |   13   |    22     | 100  |
         |"Afternoon" " |   22    |    25    |   16   |    37     | 100  |
==========================================================================


We see from this that the associations of the "abbey" series are
nearly half of them in sense imagery, and these were almost always
visual. The names of persons also more frequently occurred in this
series than in any other. It will be recollected that in Table II. I
drew attention to the exceptionally large number, 33, in the last
column. It was perhaps 20 in excess of what would have been expected
from the general run of the other figures. This was wholly due to
visual imagery of scenes with which I was first acquainted after
reaching manhood, and shows, I think, that the scenes of childhood
and youth, though vividly impressed on the memory, are by no means
numerous, and may be quite thrown into the background by the
abundance of after experiences; but this, as we have seen, is not the
case with the other forms of association. Verbal memories of old date,
such as Biblical scraps, family expressions, bits of poetry, and the
like, are very numerous, and rise to the thoughts so quickly,
whenever anything suggests them, that they commonly outstrip all
competitors. Associations connected with the "abasement" series are
strongly characterised by histrionic ideas, and by sense imagery,
which to a great degree merges into a histrionic character. Thus the
word "abhorrence" suggested to me, on three out of the four trials,
an image of the attitude of Martha in the famous picture of the
raising of Lazarus by Sebastian del Piombo in the National Gallery.
She stands with averted head, doubly sheltering her face by her hands
from even a sidelong view of the opened grave. Now I could not be
sure how far I saw the picture as such, in my mental view, or how
far I had thrown my own personality into the picture, and was acting
it as actors might act a mystery play, by the puppets of my own brain,
that were parts of myself. As a matter of fact, I entered it under
the heading of sense imagery, but it might very properly have gone
to swell the number of the histrionic entries.

The "afternoon" series suggested a great preponderance of mere catch
words, showing how slowly I was able to realise the meaning of
abstractions; the phrases intruded themselves before the thoughts
became defined. It occasionally occurred that I puzzled wholly over
a word, and made no entry at all; in thirteen cases either this
happened, or else after one idea had occurred the second was too
confused and obscure to admit of record, and mention of it had to be
omitted in the foregoing Table. These entries have forcibly shown to
me the great imperfection in my generalising powers; and I am sure
that most persons would find the same if they made similar trials.
Nothing is a surer sign of high intellectual capacity than the power
of quickly seizing and easily manipulating ideas of a very abstract
nature. Commonly we grasp them very imperfectly, and cling to their
skirts with great difficulty.

In comparing the order in which the ideas presented themselves, I
find that a decided precedence is assumed by the histrionic ideas,
wherever they occur; that verbal associations occur first and with
great quickness on many occasions, but on the whole that they are
only a little more likely to occur first than second; and that
imagery is decidedly more likely to be the second than the first of
the associations called up by a word. In short, gesture-language
appeals the most quickly to my feelings,

It would be very instructive to print the actual records at length,
made by many experimenters, if the records could be clubbed together
and thrown into a statistical form; but it would be too absurd to
print one's own singly. They lay bare the foundations of a man's
thoughts with curious distinctness, and exhibit his mental anatomy
with more vividness and truth than he would probably care to publish
to the world.

It remains to summarise what has been said in the foregoing memoir.
I have desired to show how whole 1 strata of mental operations that
have lapsed out of ordinary consciousness, admit of being dragged
into light, recorded and treated statistically, and how the
obscurity that attends the initial steps of our thoughts can thus be
pierced and dissipated. I then showed measurably the rate at which
associations sprung up, their character, the date of their first
formation, their tendency to recurrence, and their relative
precedence. Also I gave an instance showing how the phenomenon of a
long-forgotten scene, suddenly starting into consciousness, admitted
in many cases of being explained. Perhaps the strongest of the
impressions left by these experiments regards the multifariousness
of the work done by the mind in a state of half-unconsciousness, and
the valid reason they afford for believing in the existence of still
deeper strata of mental operations, sunk wholly below the level of
consciousness, which may account for such mental phenomena as cannot
otherwise be explained. We gain an insight by these experiments into
the marvellous number and nimbleness of our mental associations, and
we also learn that they are very far indeed from being infinite in
their variety. We find that our working stock of ideas is narrowly
limited and that the mind continually recurs to the same instruments
in conducting its operations, therefore its tracks necessarily
become more defined and its flexibility diminished as age advances.




ANTECHAMBER OF CONSCIOUSNESS.

When I am engaged in trying to think anything out, the process of
doing so appears to me to be this: The ideas that lie at any moment
within my full consciousness seem to attract of their own accord the
most appropriate out of a number of other ideas that are lying close
at hand, but imperfectly within the range of my consciousness. There
seems to be a presence-chamber in my mind where full consciousness
holds court, and where two or three ideas are at the same time in
audience, and an antechamber full of more or less allied ideas,
which is situated just beyond the full ken of consciousness. Out of
this antechamber the ideas most nearly allied to those in the
presence-chamber appear to be summoned in a mechanically logical way,
and to have their turn of audience.

The successful progress of thought appears to depend--first, on a
large attendance in the antechamber; secondly, on the presence there
of no ideas except such as are strictly germane to the topic under
consideration; thirdly, on the justness of the logical mechanism
that issues the summons. The thronging of the antechamber is, I am
convinced, altogether beyond my control; if the ideas do not appear,
I cannot create them, nor compel them to come. The exclusion of
alien ideas is accompanied by a sense of mental effort and volition
whenever the topic under consideration is unattractive, otherwise it
proceeds automatically, for if an intruding idea finds nothing to
cling to, it is unable to hold its place in the antechamber, and
slides back again. An animal absorbed in a favourite occupation
shows no sign of painful effort of attention; on the contrary, he
resents interruption that solicits his attention elsewhere. The
consequence of all this is that the mind frequently does good work
without the slightest exertion. In composition it will often produce
a better effect than if it acted with effort, because the essence of
good composition is that the ideas should be connected by the
easiest possible transitions. When a man has been thinking hard and
long upon a subject, he becomes temporarily familiar with certain
steps of thought, certain short cuts, and certain far-fetched
associations, that do not commend themselves to the minds of other
persons, nor indeed to his own at other times; therefore, it is
better that his transitory familiarity with them should have come to
an end before he begins to write or speak. When he returns to the
work after a sufficient pause he is conscious that his ideas have
settled; that is, they have lost their adventitious relations to one
another, and stand in those in which they are likely to reside
permanently in his own mind, and to exist in the minds of others.

Although the brain is able to do very fair work fluently in an
automatic way, and though it will of its own accord strike out
sudden and happy ideas, it is questionable if it is capable of
working thoroughly and profoundly without past or present effort.
The character of this effort seems to me chiefly to lie in bringing
the contents of the antechamber more nearly within the ken of
consciousness, which then takes comprehensive note of all its
contents, and compels the logical faculty to test them _seriatim_
before selecting the fittest for a summons to the presence-chamber.

Extreme fluency and a vivid and rapid imagination are gifts
naturally and healthfully possessed by those who rise to be great
orators or literary men, for they could not have become successful
in those careers without it. The curious fact already alluded to of
five editors of newspapers being known to me as having phantasmagoria,
points to a connection between two forms of fluency, the literary
and the visual. Fluency may be also a morbid faculty, being markedly
increased by alcohol (as poets are never tired of telling us), and
by various drugs; and it exists in delirium, insanity, and states of
high emotions. The fluency of a vulgar scold is extraordinary.

In preparing to write or speak upon a subject of which the details
have been mastered, I gather, after some inquiry, that the usual
method among persons who have the gift of fluency is to think
cursorily on topics connected with it, until what I have called the
antechamber is well filled with cognate ideas. Then, to allow the
ideas to link themselves in their own way, breaking the linkage
continually and recommencing afresh until some line of thought has
suggested itself that appears from a rapid and light glance to
thread the chief topics together. After this the connections are
brought step by step fully into consciousness, they are
short-circuited here and extended there, as found advisable until a
firm connection is found to be established between all parts of the
subject. After this is done the mental effort is over, and the
composition may proceed fluently in an automatic way. Though this, I
believe, is a usual way, it is by no means universal, for there are
very great differences in the conditions under which different
persons compose most readily. They seem to afford as good evidence
of the variety of mental and bodily constitutions as can be met with
in any other line of inquiry.

It is very reasonable to think that part at least of the inward
response to spiritual yearnings is of similar origin to the visions,
thoughts, and phrases that arise automatically when the mind has
prepared itself to receive them. The devout man attunes his mind to
holy ideas, he excludes alien thoughts, and he waits and watches in
stillness. Gradually the darkness is lifted, the silence of the mind
is broken, and the spiritual responses are heard in the way so often
described by devout men of all religions. This seems to me precisely
analogous to the automatic presentation of ordinary ideas to orators
and literary men, and to the visions of which I spoke in the chapter
on that subject. Dividuality replaces individuality, and one portion
of the mind communicates with another portion as with a different
person.

Some persons and races are naturally more imaginative than others,
and show their visionary tendency in every one of the respects named.
They are fanciful, oratorical, poetical, and credulous. The
"enthusiastic" faculties all seem to hang together; I shall recur to
this in the chapter on enthusiasm.

I have already pointed out the existence of a morbid form of piety:
there is also a morbid condition of apparent inspiration to which
imaginative women are subject, especially those who suffer more or
less from hysteria. It is accompanied in a very curious way,
familiar to medical men, by almost incredible acts of deceit. It is
found even in ladies of position apparently above the suspicion of
vulgar fraud, and seems associated with a strange secret desire to
attract notice. Ecstatics, seers of visions, and devout fasting
girls who eat on the sly, often belong to this category.




EARLY SENTIMENTS.

The child is passionately attached to his home, then to his school,
his country, and religion; yet how entirely the particular home,
school, country, and religion are a matter of accident! He is born
prepared to attach himself as a climbing plant is naturally disposed
to climb, the kind of stick being of little importance. The models
upon whom the child or boy forms himself are the boys or men whom he
has been thrown amongst, and whom from some incidental cause he may
have learned to love and respect. The every-day utterances, the
likes and dislikes of his parents, their social and caste feelings,
their religious persuasions are absorbed by him; their views or
those of his teachers become assimilated and made his own. If a
mixed marriage should have taken place, and the father should die
while the children are yet young, and if a question arise between
the executors of his will and the mother as to the religious
education of the children, application is made as a matter of course
to the Court of Chancery, who decide that the children shall be
brought up as Protestants or as Catholics as the case may be, or the
sons one way and the daughters the other; and they are, and usually
remain so afterwards when free to act for themselves.

It is worthy of note that many of the deaf-mutes who are first
taught to communicate freely with others after they had passed the
period of boyhood, and are asked about their religious feelings up
to that time, are reported to tell the same story. They say that the
meaning of the church service whither they had accompanied their
parents, and of the kneeling to pray, had been absolutely
unintelligible, and a standing puzzle to them. The ritual touched no
chord in their untaught natures that responded in unison. Very much
of what we fondly look upon as a natural religious sentiment is
purely traditional.

The word religion may fairly be applied to any group of sentiments
or persuasions that  are strong  enough  to bind us to do that which
we intellectually may acknowledge to be our duty, and the possession
of some form of religion in this larger sense of the word is of the
utmost importance to moral stability. The sentiments must be strong
enough to make us ashamed at the mere thought of committing, and
distressed during the act of committing any untruth, or any
uncharitable act, or of neglecting what we feel to be right, in
order to indulge in laziness or gratify some passing desire. So long
as experience shows the religion to be competent to produce this
effect, it seems reasonable to believe that the particular dogma is
comparatively of little importance. But  as  the dogma or sentiments,
whatever they be, if they are not naturally instinctive, must be
ingrained in the character to produce their full effect, they should
be instilled early in life and allowed  to grow unshaken until their
roots are firmly fixed. The consciousness of this fact makes the
form of religious teaching in every church and creed identical in
one important particular though its substance may vary in every
respect. In subjects unconnected with sentiment, the freest inquiry
and the fullest deliberation are required before it is  thought
decorous to form a final opinion; but wherever sentiment is involved,
and especially in questions of religious dogma, about which there is
more sentiment and more difference of opinion among wise, virtuous,
and  truth-seeking men than  about any  other  subject  whatever,
free inquiry is peremptorily discouraged. The religious instructor
in every creed is one who makes it his profession to saturate his
pupils with prejudice. A vast and perpetual clamour arises from the
pulpits of endless proselytising sects throughout this great empire,
the priests of all of them crying with one consent, "This is the way,
shut your ears to the words of those who teach differently; don't
look at their books, do not even mention their names except to scoff
at  them; they are damnable. Have faith in what I tell you, and save
your souls!" In which of these conflicting doctrines are we to place
our faith if we are not to hear all sides, and to rely upon our own
judgment in the end? Are we to understand that it is the duty of man
to be credulous in accepting whatever the priest in whose
neighbourhood he happens to reside may say? Is it to believe
whatever his parents may have lovingly taught him? There are a vast
number of foolish men and women in the world who marry and have
children, and because they deal lovingly with their children it does
not at all follow that they can instruct them wisely. Or is it to
have faith in what the wisest men of all ages have found peace in
believing? The Catholic phrase, "_quod semper quod ubique quod
omnibus_"--"that which has been believed at all times, in all places,
and by all men"--has indeed a fine rolling sound, but where is the
dogma that satisfies its requirements? Or is it, such and such
really good and wise men with whom you are acquainted, and whom, it
may be, you have the privilege of knowing, have lived consistent
lives through the guidance of these dogmas, how can you who are many
grades their inferior in good works, in capacity and in experience,
presume to set up your opinion against theirs? The reply is, that it
is a matter of history and notoriety that other very good, capable,
and inexperienced men have led and are leading consistent lives
under the guidance of totally different dogmas, and that some of
them a few generations back would have probably burned your modern
hero as a heretic if he had lived in their times and they could have
got hold of him. Also, that men, however eminent in goodness,
intellect, and experience, may be deeply prejudiced, and that their
judgment in matters where their prejudices are involved cannot
thenceforward be trusted. Watches, as electricians know to their cost,
are liable to have their steel work accidentally magnetised, and the
best chronometer under those conditions can never again be trusted
to keep correct time.

Lastly, we are told to have faith in our conscience? well we know
now a great deal more about conscience than formerly. Ethnologists
have studied the manifestations of conscience in different people,
and do not find that they are consistent. Conscience is now known to
be partly transmitted by inheritance in the way and under the
conditions clearly explained by Mr. Darwin, and partly to be an
unsuspected result of early education. The value of inherited
conscience lies in its being the organised result of the social
experiences of many generations, but it fails in so far as it
expresses the experience of generations whose habits differed from
our own. The doctrine of evolution shows that no race can be in
perfect harmony with its surroundings; the latter are continually
changing, while the organism of the race hobbles after, vainly
trying to overtake them. Therefore the inherited part of conscience
cannot be an infallible guide, and the acquired part of it may,
under the influence of dogma, be a very bad one. The history of
fanaticism shows too clearly that this is not only a theory but a
fact. Happy the child, especially in these inquiring days, who has
been taught a religion that mainly rests on the moral obligations
between man and man in domestic and national life, and which, so far
as it is necessarily dogmatic, rests chiefly upon the proper
interpretation of facts about which there is no dispute,--namely, on
those habitual occurrences which are always open to observation, and
which form the basis of so-called natural religion.

It would be instructive to make a study of the working religion of
good and able men of all nations, in order to discover the real
motives by which they were severally animated,--men, I mean, who had
been tried by both prosperity and adversity, and had borne the test;
who, while they led lives full of interest to themselves, were
beloved by their own family, noted among those with whom they had
business relations for their probity and conciliatory ways, and
honoured by a wider circle for their unselfish furtherance of the
public good. Such men exist of many faiths and in many races.

Another interesting and cognate inquiry would be into the motives
that have sufficed to induce men who were leading happy lives, to
meet death willingly at a time when they were not particularly
excited. Probably the number of instances to be found, say among
Mussulmans, who are firm believers in the joys of Mahomet's Paradise,
would not be more numerous than among the Zulus, who have no belief
in any paradise at all, but are influenced by martial honour and
patriotism. There is an Oriental phrase, as I have been told, that
the fear of the inevitable approach of death is a European malady.

Terror at any object is quickly taught if it is taught consistently,
whether the terror be reasonable or not. There are few more stupid
creatures than fish, but they notoriously soon learn to be
frightened at any newly-introduced method of capture, say by an
artificial fly, which, at first their comrades took greedily. Some
one fish may have seen others caught, and have learned to take fright
at the fly. Whenever he saw it again he would betray his terror by
some instinctive gesture, which would be seen and understood by
others, and so instruction in distrusting the fly appears to spread.

All gregarious animals are extremely quick at learning terrors from
one another. It is a condition of their existence that they should
do so, as was explained at length in a previous chapter. Their
safety lies in mutual intelligence and support. When most of them
are browsing a few are always watching, and at the least signal of
alarm the whole herd takes fright simultaneously. Gregarious animals
are quickly alive to their mutual signals; it is beautiful to watch
great flocks of birds as they wheel in their flight and suddenly
show the flash of all their wings against the sky, as they
simultaneously and suddenly change their direction. Much of the
tameness or wildness of an animal's character is probably due to the
placidity or to the frequent starts of alarm of the mother while she
was rearing it. I was greatly struck with some evidence I happened
to meet with, of the pervading atmosphere of alarm and suspicion in
which the children of criminal parents are brought up, and which, in
combination with their inherited disposition, makes them, in the
opinion of many observers, so different to other children. The
evidence of which I speak lay in the tone of letters sent by
criminal parents to their children, who were inmates of the Princess
Mary Village Homes, from which I had the opportunity, thanks to the
kindness of the Superintendent, Mrs. Meredith, of hearing and seeing
extracts. They were full of such phrases as "Mind you do not say
anything about this," though the matters referred to were, to all
appearance, unimportant.

The writings of Dante on the horrible torments of the damned, and
the realistic pictures of the same subject in frescoes and other
pictures of the same date, showing the flames and the flesh hooks
and the harrows, indicate the transforming effect of those cruel
times, fifteen generations ago, upon the disposition of men. Revenge
and torture had been so commonly practised by rulers that they seemed
to be appropriate attributes of every high authority, and the
artists of those days saw no incongruity in supposing that a
supremely powerful master, however beneficent he might be, would
make the freest use of them.

Aversion is taught as easily as terror, when the object of it is
neutral and not especially attractive to an unprejudiced taste. I
can testify in my own person to the somewhat rapidly-acquired and
long-retained fancies concerning the clean and unclean, upon which
Jews and Mussulmans lay such curious stress. It was the result of my
happening to spend a year in the East, at an age when the brain is
very receptive of new ideas, and when I happened to be much
impressed by the nobler aspects of Mussulman civilisation, especially,
I may say, with the manly conformity of their every-day practice to
their creed, which contrasts sharply with what we see among most
Europeans, who profess extreme unworldliness and humiliation on one
day of the week, and act in a worldly and masterful manner during
the remaining six. Although many years have passed since that time, I
still find the old feelings in existence--for instance, that of
looking on the left hand as unclean.

It is difficult to an untravelled Englishman, who has not had an
opportunity of throwing himself into the spirit of the East, to
credit the disgust and detestation that numerous every-day acts,
which appear perfectly harmless to his countrymen, excite in many
Orientals.

To conclude, the power of nurture is very great in implanting
sentiments of a religious nature, of terror and of aversion, and in
giving a fallacious sense of their being natural instincts. But it
will be observed that the circumstances from which these influences
proceed, affect large classes simultaneously, forming a kind of
atmosphere in which every member of them passes his life. They
produce the cast of mind that distinguishes an Englishman from a
foreigner, and one class of Englishman from another, but they have
little influence in creating the differences that exist between
individuals of the same class.




HISTORY OF TWINS.

The exceedingly close resemblance attributed to twins has been the
subject of many novels and plays, and most persons have felt a
desire to know upon what basis of truth those works of fiction may
rest. But twins have a special claim upon our attention; it is, that
their history affords means of distinguishing between the effects of
tendencies received at birth, and of those that were imposed by the
special circumstances of their after lives. The objection to
statistical evidence in proof of the inheritance of peculiar
faculties has always been: "The persons whom you compare may have
lived under similar social conditions and have had similar
advantages of education, but such prominent conditions are only a
small part of those that determine the future of each man's life. It
is to trifling accidental circumstances that the bent of his
disposition and his success are mainly due, and these you leave
wholly out of account--in fact, they do not admit of being tabulated,
and therefore your statistics, however plausible at first sight, are
really of very little use." No method of inquiry which I had
previously been able to carry out--and I have tried many methods--is
wholly free from this objection. I have therefore attacked the
problem from the opposite side, seeking for some new method by which
it would be possible to weigh in just scales the effects of Nature
and Nurture, and to ascertain their respective shares in framing the
disposition and intellectual ability of men. The life-history of
twins supplies what I wanted. We may begin by inquiring about twins
who were closely alike in boyhood and youth, and who were educated
together for many years, and learn whether they subsequently grew
unlike, and, if so, what the main causes were which, in the opinion
of the family, produced the dissimilarity. In this way we can obtain
direct evidence of the kind we want. Again, we may obtain yet more
valuable evidence by a converse method. We can inquire into the
history of twins who were exceedingly unlike in childhood, and learn
how far their characters became assimilated under the influence of
identical nurture, inasmuch as they had the same home, the same
teachers, the same associates, and in every other respect the same
surroundings.

My materials were obtained by sending circulars of inquiry to
persons who were either twins themselves or near relations of twins.
The printed questions were in thirteen groups; the last of them
asked for the addresses of other twins known to the recipient, who
might be likely to respond if I wrote to them. This happily led to a
continually widening circle of correspondence, which I pursued until
enough material was accumulated for a general reconnaisance of the
subject.

There is a large literature relating to twins in their purely
surgical and physiological aspect. The reader interested in this
should consult _Die Lehre von den Zwillingen_, von L. Kleinwaechter,
Prag. 1871. It is full of references, but it is also unhappily
disfigured by a number of numerical misprints, especially in page 26.
I have not found any book that treats of twins from my present point
of view.

The reader will easily understand that the word "twins" is a vague
expression, which covers two very dissimilar events--the one
corresponding to the progeny of animals that usually bear more than
one at a birth, each of the progeny being derived from a separate
ovum, while the other event is due to the development of two
germinal spots in the same ovum. In the latter case they are
enveloped in the same membrane, and all such twins are found
invariably to be of the same sex. The consequence of this is, that I
find a curious discontinuity in my results. One would have expected
that twins would commonly be found to possess a certain average
likeness to one another; that a few would greatly exceed that
average likeness, and a few would greatly fall short of it. But this
is not at all the case. Extreme similarity and extreme dissimilarity
between twins of the same sex are nearly as common as moderate
resemblance. When the twins are a boy and a girl, they are never
closely alike; in fact, their origin is never due to the development
of two germinal spots in the same ovum.

I received about eighty returns of cases of close similarity,
thirty-five of which entered into many instructive details. In a few
of these not a single point of difference could be specified. In the
remainder, the colour of the hair and eyes were almost always
identical; the height, weight, and strength were nearly so.
Nevertheless, I have a few cases of a notable difference in height,
weight, and strength, although the resemblance was otherwise very
near. The manner and personal address of the thirty-five pairs of
twins are usually described as very similar, but accompanied by a
slight difference of expression, familiar to near relatives, though
unperceived by strangers. The intonation of the voice when speaking
is commonly the same, but it frequently happens that the twins sing
in different keys. Most singularly, the one point in which
similarity is rare is the handwriting. I cannot account for this,
considering how strongly handwriting runs in families, but I am sure
of the fact. I have only one case in which nobody, not even the twins
themselves, could distinguish their own notes of lectures, etc.;
barely two or three in which the handwriting was undistinguishable
by others, and only a few in which it was described as closely alike.
On the other hand, I have many in which it is stated to be unlike,
and some in which it is alluded to as the only point of difference.
It would appear that the handwriting is a very delicate test of
difference in organisation--a conclusion which I commend to the
notice of enthusiasts in the art of discovering character by the
handwriting.

One of my inquiries was for anecdotes regarding mistakes made
between the twins by their near relatives. The replies are numerous,
but not very varied in character. When the twins are children, they
are usually distinguished by ribbons tied round the wrist or neck;
nevertheless the one is sometimes fed, physicked, and whipped by
mistake for the other, and the description of these little domestic
catastrophes was usually given by the mother, in a phraseology that
is somewhat touching by reason of its seriousness. I have one case
in which a doubt remains whether the children were not changed in
their bath, and the presumed A is not really B, and _vice versa_. In
another case, an artist was engaged on the portraits of twins who
were between three and four years of age; he had to lay aside his
work for three weeks, and, on resuming it, could not tell to which
child the respective likenesses he had in hand belonged. The
mistakes become less numerous on the part of the mother during the
boyhood and girlhood of the twins, but are almost as frequent as
before on the part of strangers. I have many instances of tutors
being unable to distinguish their twin pupils. Two girls used
regularly to impose on their music teacher when one of them wanted a
whole holiday; they had their lessons at separate hours, and the one
girl sacrificed herself to receive two lessons on the same day,
while the other one enjoyed herself from morning to evening. Here is
a brief and comprehensive account:--

"Exactly alike in all, their schoolmasters never could tell them
apart; at dancing parties they constantly changed partners without
discovery; their close resemblance is scarcely diminished by age."

The following is a typical schoolboy anecdote:--

"Two twins were fond of playing tricks, and complaints were
frequently made; but the boys would never own which was the guilty
one, and the complainants were never certain which of the two he was.
One head master used to say he would never flog the innocent for the
guilty, and another used to flog both."

No less than nine anecdotes have reached me of a twin seeing his or
her reflection in a looking-glass, and addressing it in the belief
it was the other twin in person.

I have many anecdotes of mistakes when the twins were nearly grown up.
Thus:--

"Amusing scenes occurred at college when one twin came to visit the
other; the porter on one occasion refusing to let the visitor out of
the college gates, for, though they stood side by side, he professed
ignorance as to which he ought to allow to depart."

Children are usually quick in distinguishing between their parent
and his or her twin; but I have two cases to the contrary. Thus, the
daughter of a twin says:--

"Such was the marvellous similarity of their features, voice, manner,
etc., that I remember, as a child, being very much puzzled, and I
think, had my aunt lived much with us, I should have ended by
thinking I had two mothers."

In the other case, a father who was a twin, remarks of himself and
his brother:--

"We were extremely alike, and are so at this moment, so much so that
our children up to five and six years old did not know us apart."

I have four or five instances of doubt during an engagement of
marriage. Thus:--

"A married first, but both twins met the lady together for the first
time, and fell in love with her there and then. A managed to see her
home and to gain her affection, though B went sometimes courting in
his place, and neither the lady nor her parents could tell which was
which."

I have also a German letter, written in quaint terms, about twin
brothers who married sisters, but could not easily be distinguished
by them.[13] In the well-known novel by Mr. Wilkie Collins of
_Poor Miss Finch_, the blind girl distinguishes the twin she loves
by the touch of his hand, which gives her a thrill that the touch of
the other brother does not. Philosophers have not, I believe, as yet
investigated the conditions of such thrills; but I have a case in
which Miss Finch's test would have failed. Two persons, both friends
of a certain twin lady, told me that she had frequently remarked to
them that "kissing her twin sister was not like kissing her other
sisters, but like kissing herself--her own hand, for example."

It would be an interesting experiment for twins who were closely
alike to try how far dogs could distinguish them by scent.

[Footnote 13: I take this opportunity of withdrawing an anecdote,
happily of no great importance, published in _Men of Science_, p. 14,
about a man personating his twin brother for a joke at supper, and
not being discovered by his wife. It was told me on good authority;
but I have reason to doubt the fact, as the story is not known to
the son of one of the twins. However, the twins in question were
extraordinarily alike, and I have many anecdotes about them sent me
by the latter gentleman.]

I have a few anecdotes of strange mistakes made between twins in
adult life. Thus, an officer writes:--

"On one occasion when I returned from foreign service my father
turned to me and said, 'I thought you were in London,' thinking I
was my brother--yet he had not seen me for nearly four years--our
resemblance was so great."

The next and last anecdote I shall give is, perhaps, the most
remarkable of those I have; it was sent me by the brother of the
twins, who were in middle life at the time of its occurrence:--

"A was again coming home from India, on leave; the ship did not
arrive for some days after it was due; the twin brother B had come
up from his quarters to receive A, and their old mother was very
nervous. One morning A rushed in saying, 'Oh, mother, how are you?'
Her answer was, 'No, B, it's a bad joke; you know how anxious I am!'
and it was a little time before A could persuade her that he was the
real man."

Enough has been said to prove that an extremely close personal
resemblance frequently exists between twins of the same sex; and that,
although the resemblance usually diminishes as they grow into
manhood and womanhood, some cases occur in which the diminution of
resemblance is hardly perceptible. It must be borne in mind that it
is not necessary to ascribe the divergence of development, when it
occurs, to the effect of different nurtures, but it is quite
possible that it may be due to the late appearance of qualities
inherited at birth, though dormant in early life, like gout. To this
I shall recur.

There is a curious feature in the character of the resemblance
between twins, which has been alluded to by a few correspondents; it
is well illustrated by the following quotations. A mother of twins
says:--

"There seemed to be a sort of interchangeable likeness in expression,
that often gave to each the effect of being more like his brother
than himself."

Again, two twin brothers, writing to me, after analysing their
points of resemblance, which are close and numerous, and pointing
out certain shades of difference, add--

"These seem to have marked us through life, though for a while, when
we were first separated, the one to go to business, and the other to
college, our respective characters were inverted; we both think that
at that time we each ran into the character of the other. The proof
of this consists in our own recollections, in our correspondence by
letter, and in the views which we then took of matters in which we
were interested."

In explanation of this apparent interchangeableness, we must
recollect that no character is simple, and that in twins who
strongly resemble each other, every expression in the one may be
matched by a corresponding expression in the other, but it does not
follow that the same expression should be the prevalent one in both
cases. Now it is by their prevalent expressions that we should
distinguish between the twins; consequently when one twin has
temporarily the expression which is the prevalent one in his brother,
he is apt to be mistaken for him. There are also cases where the
development of the two twins is not strictly _pari passu_; they
reach the same goal at the same time, but not by identical stages.
Thus: A is born the larger, then B overtakes and surpasses A, and is
in his turn overtaken by A, the end being that the twins, on
reaching adult life, are of the same size. This process would aid in
giving an interchangeable likeness at certain periods of their growth,
and is undoubtedly due to nature more frequently than to nurture.

Among my thirty-five detailed cases of close similarity, there are
no less than seven in which both twins suffered from some special
ailment or had some exceptional peculiarity. One twin writes that
she and her sister "have both the defect of not being able to come
downstairs quickly, which, however, was not born with them, but came
on at the age of twenty." Three pairs of twins have peculiarities in
their fingers; in one case it consists in a slight congenital
flexure of one of the joints of the little finger; it was inherited
from a grandmother, but neither parents, nor brothers, nor sisters
show the least trace of it. In another case the twins have a
peculiar way of bending the fingers, and there was a faint tendency
to the same peculiarity in the mother, but in her alone of all the
family. In a third case, about which I made a few inquiries, which
is given by Mr. Darwin, but is not included in my returns, there was
no known family tendency to the peculiarity which was observed in
the twins of having a crooked little finger. In another pair of twins,
one was born ruptured, and the other became so at six months old.
Two twins at the age of twenty-three were attacked by toothache, and
the same tooth had to be extracted in each case. There are curious
and close correspondences mentioned in the falling off of the hair.
Two cases are mentioned of death from the same disease; one of which
is very affecting. The outline of the story was that the twins were
closely alike and singularly attached, and had identical tastes;
they both obtained Government clerkships, and kept house together,
when one sickened and died of Bright's disease, and the other also
sickened of the same disease and died seven months later.

Both twins were apt to sicken at the same time in no less than nine
out of the thirty-five cases. Either their illnesses, to which I
refer, were non-contagious, or, if contagious, the twins caught them
simultaneously; they did not catch them the one from the other. This
implies so intimate a constitutional resemblance, that it is proper
to give some quotations in evidence. Thus, the father of two twins
says:--

"Their general health is closely alike; whenever one of them has an
illness, the other invariably has the same within a day or two, and
they usually recover in the same order. Such has been the case with
whooping-cough, chicken-pox, and measles; also with slight bilious
attacks, which they have successively. Latterly, they had a feverish
attack at the same time."

Another parent of twins says:--

"If anything ails one of them, identical symptoms _nearly always_
appear in the other; this has been singularly visible in two
instances during the last two months. Thus, when in London, one fell
ill with a violent attack of dysentery, and within twenty-four hours
the other had precisely the same symptoms."

A medical man writes of twins with whom he is well acquainted:--

"Whilst I knew them, for a period of two years, there was not the
slightest tendency towards a difference in body or mind; external
influences seemed powerless to produce any dissimilarity."

The mother of two other twins, after describing how they were ill
simultaneously up to the age of fifteen, adds, that they shed their
first milk-teeth within a few hours of each other.

Trousseau has a very remarkable case (in the chapter on Asthma) in
his important work _Clinique M. edicale_. (In the edition of 1873 it
is in vol. ii. p. 473.) It was quoted at length in the original
French, in Mr. Darwin's _Variation under Domestication_, vol. ii. p.
252. The following is a translation:--

"I attended twin brothers so extraordinarily alike, that it was
impossible for me to tell which was which, without seeing them side
by side. But their physical likeness extended still deeper, for they
had, so to speak, a yet more remarkable pathological resemblance.
Thus, one of them, whom I saw at the Neothermes at Paris, suffering
from rheumatic ophthalmia, said to me, 'At this instant my brother
must be having an ophthalmia like mine;' and, as I had exclaimed
against such an assertion, he showed me a few days afterwards a
letter just received by him from his brother, who was at that time
at Vienna, and who expressed himself in these words--'I have my
ophthalmia; you must be having yours.' However singular this story
may appear, the fact is none the less exact; it has not been told to
me by others, but I have seen it myself; and I have seen other
analogous cases in my practice. These twins were also asthmatic, and
asthmatic to a frightful degree. Though born in Marseilles, they
were never able to stay in that town, where their business affairs
required them to go, without having an attack. Still more strange,
it was sufficient for them to get away only as far as Toulon in
order to be cured of the attack caught at Marseilles. They travelled
continually, and in all countries, on business affairs, and they
remarked that certain localities were extremely hurtful to them, and
that in others they were free from all asthmatic symptoms."

I do not like to pass over here a most dramatic tale in the
_Psychologie Morbide_ of Dr. J. Moreau (de Tours), M. edecin de
l'Hospice de Bicetre. Paris, 1859, p. 172. He speaks "of two twin
brothers who had been confined, on account of monomania, at Bicetre":--

"Physically the two young men are so nearly alike that the one is
easily mistaken for the other. Morally, their resemblance is no less
complete, and is most remarkable in its details. Thus, their
dominant ideas are absolutely the same. They both consider
themselves subject to imaginary persecutions; the same enemies have
sworn their destruction, and employ the same means to effect it.
Both have hallucinations of hearing. They are both of them
melancholy and morose; they never address a word to anybody, and
will hardly answer the questions that others address to them. They
always keep apart, and never communicate with one another. An
extremely curious fact which has been frequently noted by the
superintendents of their section of the hospital, and by myself, is
this: From time to time, at very irregular intervals of two, three,
and many months, without appreciable cause, and by the purely
spontaneous effect of their illness, a very marked change takes
place in the condition of the two brothers. Both of them, at the
same time, and often on the same day, rouse themselves from their
habitual stupor and prostration; they make the same complaints, and
they come of their own accord to the physician, with an urgent
request to be liberated. I have seen this strange thing occur, even
when they were some miles apart, the one being at Bicetre, and the
other living at Saint-Anne."

I sent a copy of this passage to the principal authorities among the
physicians to the insane in England, asking if they had ever
witnessed any similar case. In reply, I have received three
noteworthy instances, but none to be compared in their exact
parallelism with that just given. The details of these three cases
are painful, and it is not necessary to my general purpose that I
should further allude to them.

There is another curious French case of insanity in twins, which was
pointed out to me by Sir James Paget, described by Dr. Baume in the
_Annales M. edico-Psychologiques_, 4 serie, vol. i., 1863, p. 312,
of which the following is an abstract. The original contains a few
more details, but is too long to quote: Francois and Martin, fifty
years of age, worked as railroad contractors between Quimper and
Chateaulin. Martin had twice slight attacks of insanity. On January 15
a box was robbed in which the twins had deposited their savings. On
the night of January 23-24 both Francois (who lodged at Quimper) and
Martin (who lived with his wife and children at St. Lorette, two
leagues from Quimper) had the same dream at the same hour, three a.m.,
and both awoke with a violent start, calling out, "I have caught the
thief! I have caught the thief! they are doing mischief to my brother!"
They were both of them extremely agitated, and gave way to similar
extravagances, dancing and leaping.

Martin sprang on his grandchild, declaring that he was the thief,
and would have strangled him if he had not been prevented; he then
became steadily worse, complained of violent pains in his head, went
out of doors on some excuse, and tried to drown himself in the river
Steir, but was forcibly stopped by his son, who had watched and
followed him. He was then taken to an asylum by gendarmes, where he
died in three hours. Francois, on his part, calmed down on the
morning of the 24th, and employed the day in inquiring about the
robbery. By a strange chance, he crossed his brother's path at the
moment when the latter was struggling with the gendarmes; then he
himself became maddened, giving way to extravagant gestures and using
incoherent language (similar to that of his brother). He then asked
to be bled, which was done, and afterwards, declaring himself to be
better, went out on the pretext of executing some commission, but
really to drown himself in the River Steir, which he actually did,
at the very spot where Martin had attempted to do the same thing a
few hours previously.

The next point which I shall mention in illustration of the
extremely close resemblance between certain twins is the similarity
in the association of their ideas. No less than eleven out of the
thirty-five cases testify to this. They make the same remarks on the
same occasion, begin singing the same song at the same moment, and
so on; or one would commence a sentence, and the other would finish
it. An observant friend graphically described to me the effect
produced on her by two such twins whom she had met casually. She said:
"Their teeth grew alike, they spoke alike and together, and said the
same things, and seemed just like one person." One of the most
curious anecdotes that I have received concerning this similarity of
ideas was that one twin, A, who happened to be at a town in Scotland,
bought a set of champagne glasses which caught his attention, as a
surprise for his brother B; while, at the same time, B, being in
England, bought a similar set of precisely the same pattern as a
surprise for A. Other anecdotes of a like kind have reached me about
these twins.

The last point to which I shall allude regards the tastes and
dispositions of the thirty-five pairs of twins. In sixteen
cases--that is, in nearly one-half of them--these were described as
closely similar; in the remaining nineteen they were much alike, but
subject to certain named differences. These differences belonged
almost wholly to such groups of qualities as these: The one was the
more vigorous, fearless, energetic; the other was gentle, clinging,
and timid; or the one was more ardent, the other more calm and placid;
or again, the one was the more independent, original, and
self-contained; the other the more generous, hasty, and vivacious.
In short, the difference was that of intensity or energy in one or
other of its protean forms; it did not extend more deeply into the
structure of the characters. The more vivacious might be subdued by
ill health, until he assumed the character of the other; or the
latter might be raised by excellent health to that of the former.
The difference was in the key-note, not in the melody.

It follows from what has been said concerning the similar
dispositions of the twins, the similarity in the associations of
their ideas, of their special ailments, and of their illnesses
generally, that the resemblances are not superficial, but extremely
intimate. I have only two cases of a strong bodily resemblance being
accompanied by mental diversity, and one case only of the converse
kind. It must be remembered that the conditions which govern extreme
likeness between twins are not the same as those between ordinary
brothers and sisters, and that it would be incorrect to conclude
from what has just been said about the twins that mental and bodily
likeness are invariably co-ordinate, such being by no means the case.

We are now in a position to understand that the phrase "close
similarity" is no exaggeration, and to realise the value of the
evidence I am about to adduce. Here are thirty-five cases of twins
who were "closely alike" in body and mind when they were young, and
who have been reared exactly alike up to their early manhood and
womanhood. Since then the conditions of their lives have changed;
what change of Nurture has produced the most variation?

It was with no little interest that I searched the records of the
thirty-five cases for an answer; and they gave an answer that was
not altogether direct, but it was distinct, and not at all what I
had expected. They showed me that in some cases the resemblance of
body and mind had continued unaltered up to old age, notwithstanding
very different conditions of life; and they showed in the other
cases that the parents ascribed such dissimilarity as there was,
wholly or almost wholly to some form of illness. In four cases it
was scarlet fever; in a fifth, typhus; in a sixth, a slight effect
was ascribed to a nervous fever; in a seventh it was the effect of
an Indian climate; in an eighth, an illness (unnamed) of nine
months' duration; in a ninth, varicose veins; in a tenth, a bad
fracture of the leg, which prevented all active exercise afterwards;
and there were three additional instances of undefined forms of ill
health. It will be sufficient to quote one of the returns; in this
the father writes:

"At birth they were _exactly_ alike, except that one was born with a
bad varicose affection, the effect of which had been to prevent any
violent exercise, such as dancing or running, and, as she has grown
older, to make her more serious and thoughtful. Had it not been for
this infirmity, I think the two would have been as exactly alike as
it is possible for two women to be, both mentally and physically;
even now they are constantly mistaken for one another."

In only a very few cases is some allusion made to the dissimilarity
being partly due to the combined action of many small influences,
and in none of the thirty-five cases is it largely, much less wholly,
ascribed to that cause. In not a single instance have I met with a
word about the growing dissimilarity being due to the action of the
firm free-will of one or both of the twins, which had triumphed over
natural tendencies; and yet a large proportion of my correspondents
happen to be clergymen, whose bent of mind is opposed, as I feel
assured from the tone of their letters, to a necessitarian view of
life.

It has been remarked that a growing diversity between twins may be
ascribed to the tardy development of naturally diverse qualities;
but we have a right, upon the evidence I have received, to go
farther than this. We have seen that a few twins retain their close
resemblance through life; in other words, instances do exist of an
apparently thorough similarity of nature, in which such difference
of external circumstances as may be consistent with the ordinary
conditions of the same social rank and country do not create
dissimilarity. Positive evidence, such as this, cannot be outweighed
by any amount of negative evidence. Therefore, in those cases where
there is a growing diversity, and where no external cause can be
assigned either by the twins themselves or by their family for it,
we may feel sure that it must be chiefly or altogether due to a want
of thorough similarity in their nature. Nay, further, in some cases
it is distinctly affirmed that the growing dissimilarity can be
accounted for in no other way. We may, therefore, broadly conclude
that the only circumstance, within the range of those by which
persons of similar conditions of life are affected, that is capable
of producing a marked effect on the character of adults, is illness
or some accident which causes physical infirmity. The twins who
closely resembled each other in childhood and early youth, and were
reared under not very dissimilar conditions, either grow unlike
through the development of natural characteristics which had lain
dormant at first, or else they continue their lives, keeping time
like two watches, hardly to be thrown out of accord except by some
physical jar. Nature is far stronger than Nurture within the limited
range that I have been careful to assign to the latter.

The effect of illness, as shown by these replies, is great, and well
deserves further consideration. It appears that the constitution of
youth is not so elastic as we are apt to think, but that an attack,
say of scarlet fever, leaves a permanent mark, easily to be measured
by the present method of comparison. This recalls an impression made
strongly on my mind several years ago, by the sight of some curves
drawn by a mathematical friend. He took monthly measurements of the
circumference of his children's heads during the first few years of
their lives, and he laid down the successive measurements on the
successive lines of a piece of ruled paper, by taking the edge of
the paper as a base. He then joined the free ends of the lines, and
so obtained a curve of growth. These curves had, on the whole, that
regularity of sweep that might have been expected, but each of them
showed occasional halts, like the landing-places on a long flight of
stairs. The development had been arrested by something, and was not
made up for by after growth. Now, on the same piece of paper my
friend had also registered the various infantile illnesses of the
children, and corresponding to each illness was one of these halts.
There remained no doubt in my mind that, if these illnesses had been
warded off, the development of the children would have been
increased by almost the precise amount lost in these halts. In other
words, the disease had drawn largely upon the capital, and not only
on the income, of their constitutions. I hope these remarks may
induce some men of science to repeat similar experiments on their
children of the future. They may compress two years of a child's
history on one side of a ruled half-sheet of foolscap paper, if they
cause each successive line to stand for a successive month,
beginning from the birth of the child; and if they economise space
by laying, not the 0-inch division of the tape against the edge of
the pages, but, say, the 10-inch division.

The steady and pitiless march of the hidden weaknesses in our
constitutions, through illness to death, is painfully revealed by
these histories of twins. We are too apt to look upon illness and
death as capricious events, and there are some who ascribe them to
the direct effect of supernatural interference, whereas the fact of
the maladies of two twins being continually alike shows that illness
and death are necessary incidents in a regular sequence of
constitutional changes beginning at birth, and upon which external
circumstances have, on the whole, very small effect. In cases where
the maladies of the twins are continually alike, the clocks of their
two lives move regularly on at the same rate, governed by their
internal mechanism. When the hands approach the hour, there are
sudden clicks, followed by a whirring of wheels; the moment that
they touch it, the strokes fall. Necessitarians may derive new
arguments from the life-histories of twins.

We will now consider the converse side of our subject, which appears
to me even the more important of the two. Hitherto we have
investigated cases where the similarity at first was close, but
afterwards became less; now we will examine those in which there was
great dissimilarity at first, and will see how far an identity of
nurture in childhood and youth tended to assimilate them. As has
been already mentioned, there is a large proportion of cases of
sharply-contrasted characteristics, both of body and mind, among
twins. I have twenty such cases, given with much detail. It is a
fact that extreme dissimilarity, such as existed between Esau and
Jacob, is a no less marked peculiarity in twins of the same sex than
extreme similarity. On this curious point, and on much else in the
history of twins, I have many remarks to make, but this is not the
place to make them.

The evidence given by the twenty cases above mentioned is absolutely
accordant, so that the character of the whole may be exactly
conveyed by a few quotations.

(1.) One parent says:--"They have had _exactly the same nurture_
from their birth up to the present time; they are both perfectly
healthy and strong, yet they are otherwise as dissimilar as two boys
could be, physically, mentally, and in their emotional nature."

(2.) "I can answer most decidedly that the twins have been perfectly
dissimilar in character, habits, and likeness from the moment of
their birth to the present time, though they were nursed by the same
woman, went to school together, and were never separated till the
age of fifteen."

(3.) "They have never been separated, never the least differently
treated in food, clothing, or education; both teethed at the same
time, both had measles, whooping-cough, and scarlatina at the same
time, and neither had had any other serious illness. Both are and
have been exceedingly healthy, and have good abilities, yet they
differ as much from each other in mental cast as any one of my
family differs from another."

(4.) "Very dissimilar in body and mind: the one is quiet, retiring,
and slow but sure; good-tempered, but disposed to be sulky when
provoked;--the other is quick, vivacious, forward, acquiring easily
and forgetting soon; quick-tempered and choleric, but quickly
forgiving and forgetting. They have been educated together and never
separated."

(5.) "They were never alike either in body or mind, and their
dissimilarity increases daily. The external influences have been
identical; they have never been separated."

(6.) "The two sisters are very different in ability and disposition.
The one is retiring, but firm and determined; she has no taste for
music or drawing. The other is of an active, excitable temperament:
she displays an unusual amount of quickness and talent, and is
passionately fond of music and drawing. From infancy, they have been
rarely separated even at school, and as children visiting their
friends, they always went together."

(7.) "They have been treated exactly alike  both were brought up by
hand; they have been under the same nurse and governess from their
birth, and they are very fond of each other. Their increasing
dissimilarity must be ascribed to a natural difference of mind and
character, as there has been nothing in their treatment to account
for it."

(8.) "They are as different as possible. [A minute and unsparing
analysis of the characters of the two twins is given by their father,
most instructive to read, but impossible to publish without the
certainty of wounding the feelings of one of the twins, if these
pages should chance to fall under his eyes.] They were brought up
entirely by hand, that is, on cow's milk, and treated by one nurse
in precisely the same manner."

(9.) "The home-training and influence were precisely the same, and
therefore I consider the dissimilarity to be accounted for almost
entirely by innate disposition and by causes over which we have no
control."

(10.) "This case is, I should think, somewhat remarkable for
dissimilarity in physique as well as for strong contrast in character.
They have been unlike in body and mind throughout their lives. Both
were reared in a country house, and both were at the same schools
till _aet._ 16."

(11.) "Singularly unlike in body and mind from babyhood; in looks,
dispositions, and tastes they are quite different. I think I may
say the dissimilarity was innate, and developed more by time than
circumstance."

(12.) "We were never in the least degree alike. I should say my
sister's and my own character are diametrically opposed, and have
been utterly different from our birth, though a very strong
affection subsists between us."

(13.) The father remarks:--"They were curiously different in body
and mind from their birth."

The surviving twin (a senior wrangler of Cambridge) adds:--"A fact
struck all our school contemporaries, that my brother and I were
complementary, so to speak, in point of ability and disposition. He
was contemplative, poetical, and literary to a remarkable degree,
showing great power in that line. I was practical, mathematical, and
linguistic. Between us we should have made a very decent sort of a
man."

I could quote others just as strong as these, in some of which the
above phrase "complementary" also appears, while I have not a single
case in which my correspondents speak of originally dissimilar
characters having become assimilated through identity of nurture.
However, a somewhat exaggerated estimate of dissimilarity may be due
to the tendency of relatives to dwell unconsciously on distinctive
peculiarities, and to disregard the far more numerous points of
likeness that would first attract the notice of a stranger. Thus in
case 11 I find the remark, "Strangers see a strong likeness between
them, but none who knows them well can perceive it."  Instances are
common of slight acquaintances mistaking members, and especially
daughters of a family, for one another, between whom intimate
friends can barely discover a resemblance. Still, making reasonable
allowance for unintentional exaggeration, the impression that all
this evidence leaves on the mind is one of some wonder whether
nurture can do anything at all, beyond giving instruction and
professional training. It emphatically corroborates and goes far
beyond the conclusions to which we had already been driven by the
cases of similarity. In those, the causes of divergence began to act
about the period of adult life, when the characters had become
somewhat fixed; but here the causes conducive to assimilation began
to act from the earliest moment of the existence of the twins, when
the disposition was most pliant, and they were continuous until the
period of adult life. There is no escape from the conclusion that
nature prevails enormously over nurture when the differences of
nurture do not exceed what is commonly to be found among persons of
the same rank of society and in the same country. My fear is, that
my evidence may seem to prove too much, and be discredited on that
account, as it appears contrary to all experience that nurture
should go for so little. But experience is often fallacious in
ascribing great effects to trifling circumstances. Many a person has
amused himself with throwing bits of stick into a tiny brook and
watching their progress; how they are arrested, first by one chance
obstacle, then by another; and again, how their onward course is
facilitated by a combination of circumstances. He might ascribe much
importance to each of these events, and think how largely the
destiny of the stick had been governed by a series of trifling
accidents. Nevertheless all the sticks succeed in passing down the
current, and in the long-run, they travel at nearly the same rate. So
it is with life, in respect to the several accidents which seem to
have had a great effect upon our careers. The one element, that
varies in different individuals, but is constant in each of them, is
the natural tendency; it corresponds to the current in the stream,
and inevitably asserts itself.

Much stress is laid on the persistence of moral impressions made in
childhood, and the conclusion is drawn, that the effects of early
teaching must be important in a corresponding degree. I acknowledge
the fact, so far as has been explained in the chapter on Early
Sentiments, but there is a considerable set-off on the other side.
Those teachings that conform to the natural aptitudes of the child
leave much more enduring marks than others. Now both the teachings
and the natural aptitudes of the child are usually derived from its
parents. They are able to understand the ways of one another more
intimately than is possible to persons not of the same blood, and
the child instinctively assimilates the habits and ways of thought
of its parents. Its disposition is "educated" by them, in the true
sense of the word; that is to say, it is evoked, not formed by them.
On these grounds I ascribe the persistence of many habits that date
from early home education, to the peculiarities of the instructors
rather than to the period when the instruction was given. The marks
left on the memory by the instructions of a foster-mother are soon
sponged clean away. Consider the history of the cuckoo, which is
reared exclusively by foster-mothers. It is probable that nearly
every young cuckoo, during a series of many hundred generations, has
been brought up in a family whose language is a chirp and a twitter.
But the cuckoo cannot or will not adopt that language, or any other
of the habits of its foster-parents. It leaves its birthplace as
soon as it is able, and finds out its own kith and kin, and
identifies itself henceforth with them. So utterly are its earliest
instructions in an alien bird-language neglected, and so completely
is its new education successful, that the note of the cuckoo tribe
is singularly correct.




DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS.[14]

  [Footnote 14: This memoir is reprinted from the _Transactions of
  the Ethnological Society_]

Before leaving the subject of Nature and Nurture, I would direct
attention to evidence bearing on the conditions under which animals
appear first to have been domesticated. It clearly shows the small
power of nurture against adverse natural tendencies.

The few animals that we now possess in a state of domestication were
first reclaimed from wildness in prehistoric times. Our remote
barbarian ancestors must be credited with having accomplished a very
remarkable feat, which no subsequent generation has rivalled. The
utmost that we of modern times have succeeded in doing, is to
improve the races of those animals that we received from our
forefathers in an already domesticated condition.

There are only two reasonable solutions of this exceedingly curious
fact. The one is, that men of highly original ideas, like the
mythical Prometheus, arose from time to time in the dawn of human
progress, and left their respective marks on the world by being the
first to subjugate the camel, the llama, the reindeer, the horse,
the ox, the sheep, the hog, the dog, or some other animal to the
service of man. The other hypothesis is that only a few species of
animals are fitted by their nature to become domestic, and that
these were discovered long ago through the exercise of no higher
intelligence than is to be found among barbarous tribes of the
present day. The failure of civilised man to add to the number of
domesticated species would on this supposition be due to the fact
that all the suitable material whence domestic animals could be
derived has been long since worked out.

I submit that the latter hypothesis is the true one for the reasons
about to be given; and if so, the finality of the process of
domestication must be accepted as one of the most striking instances
of the inflexibility of natural disposition, and of the limitations
thereby imposed upon the [15] choice of careers for animals, and by
analogy for those of men.

[Footnote 15: _Transactionsof the Ethnological Society_, 1865,
with an alteration in the opening and concluding paragraphs, and
with a few verbal emendations. If I had discussed the subject now
for the first time I should have given extracts from the and with a
few verbal emendations. If I had discussed the subject now for the
first time I should have given extracts from the works of the
travellers of the day, but it seemed needless to reopen the inquiry
merely to give it a more modern air. I have also preferred to let
the chapter stand as it was written, because considerable portions of
it have been quoted by various authors (_e.g._ Bagehot, _Economic
Studies_, pp. 161 to 166: Longman, 1880), and the original memoir is
not easily accessible.]

My argument will be this:--All savages maintain pet animals, many
tribes have sacred ones, and kings of ancient states have imported
captive animals on a vast scale, for purposes of show, from
neighbouring countries. I infer that every animal, of any pretensions,
has been tamed over and over again, and has had numerous
opportunities of becoming domesticated. But the cases are rare in
which these opportunities have led to any result. No animal is
fitted for domestication unless it fulfils certain stringent
conditions, which I will endeavour to state and to discuss. My
conclusion is, that all domesticable animals of any note have long
ago fallen under the yoke of man. In short, that the animal creation
has been pretty thoroughly, though half unconsciously, explored, by
the every-day habits of rude races and simple civilisations.

It is a fact familiar to all travellers, that savages frequently
capture young animals of various kinds, and rear them as favourites,
and sell or present them as curiosities. Human nature is generally
akin: savages may be brutal, but they are not on that account devoid
of our taste for taming and caressing young animals; nay, it is not
improbable that some races may possess it in a more marked degree
than ourselves, because it is a childish taste with us; and the
motives of an adult barbarian are very similar to those of a
civilised child.

In proving this assertion, I feel embarrassed with the multiplicity
of my facts. I have only space to submit a few typical instances,
and must, therefore, beg it will be borne in mind that the following
list could be largely reinforced. Yet even if I inserted all I have
thus far been able to collect, I believe insufficient justice would
be done to the real truth of the case. Captive animals do not
commonly fall within the observation of travellers, who mostly
confine themselves to their own encampments, and abstain from
entering the dirty dwellings of the natives; neither do the majority
of travellers think tamed animals worthy of detailed mention.
Consequently the anecdotes of their existence are scattered
sparingly among a large number of volumes. It is when those
travellers are questioned who have lived long and intimately with
savage tribes that the plenitude of available instances becomes most
apparent.

I proceed to give anecdotes of animals being tamed in various parts
of the world, at dates when they were severally beyond the reach of
civilised influences, and where, therefore, the pleasure taken by
the natives in taming them must be ascribed to their unassisted
mother-wit. It will be inferred that the same rude races who were
observed to be capable of great fondness towards animals in
particular instances, would not unfrequently show it in others.

[North America.]--The traveller Hearne, who wrote towards the end of
the last century, relates the following story of moose or elks in
the more northern parts of North America. He says:--

"I have repeatedly seen moose at Churchill as tame as sheep and even
more so.... The same Indian that brought them to the Factory had, in
the year 1770, two others so tame that when on his passage to Prince
of Wales's Fort in a canoe, the moose always followed him along the
bank of the river; and at night, or on any other occasion when the
Indians landed, the young moose generally came and fondled on them,
as the most domestic animal would have done, and never offered to
stray from the tents."

Sir John Richardson, in an obliging answer to my inquiries about the
Indians of North America, after mentioning the bison calves, wolves,
and other animals that they frequently capture and keep, said:--

"It is not unusual, I have heard, for the Indians to bring up young
bears, the women giving them milk from their own breasts."

He mentions that he himself purchased a young bear, and adds:--

"The red races are fond of pets and treat them kindly; and in
purchasing them there is always the unwillingness of the women and
children to overcome, rather than any dispute about price. My young
bear used to rob the women of the berries, they had gathered, but
the loss was borne with good nature."

I will again quote Hearne, who is unsurpassed for his minute and
accurate narratives of social scenes among the Indians and Esquimaux.
In speaking of wolves he says:--

"They always burrow underground to bring forth their young, and
though it is natural to suppose them very fierce at those times, yet
I have frequently seen the Indians go to their dens and take out the
young ones and play with them. I never knew a Northern Indian hurt
one of them; on the contrary, they always put them carefully into
the den again; and I have sometimes seen them paint the faces of the
young wolves with vermilion or red ochre."

[South America.]--Ulloa, an ancient traveller, says:--

"Though the Indian women breed fowl and other domestic animals in
their cottages, they never eat them: and even conceive such a
fondness for them, that they will not sell them, much less kill them
with their own hands. So that if a stranger who is obliged to pass
the night in one of their cottages, offers ever so much money for a
fowl, they refuse to part with it, and he finds himself under the
necessity of killing the fowl himself. At this his landlady shrieks,
dissolves into tears, and wrings her hands, as if it had been an
only son, till seeing the mischief past mending, she wipes her eyes
and quietly takes what the traveller offers her."

The care of the South American Indians, as Quiloa truly states, is
by no means confined to fowls. Mr. Bates, the distinguished
traveller and naturalist of the Amazons, has favoured me with a list
of twenty-two species of quadrupeds that he has found tame in the
encampments of the tribes of that valley. It includes the tapir, the
agouti, the guinea-pig, and the peccari. He has also noted five
species of quadrupeds that were in captivity, but not tamed. These
include the jaguar, the great ant-eater, and the armadillo. His list
of tamed birds is still more extensive.

[North Africa.]--The ancient Egyptians had a positive passion for
tamed animals, such as antelopes, monkeys, crocodiles, panthers, and
hyenas. Mr. Goodwin, the eminent Egyptologist, informed me that
"they anticipated our zoological tastes completely," and that some
of the pictures referring to tamed animals are among their very
earliest monuments, viz. 2000 or 3000 years B.C. Mr. Mansfield
Parkyns, who passed many years in Abyssinia and the countries of the
Upper Nile, writes me word in answer to my inquiries;--

"I am sure that negroes often capture and keep alive wild animals. I
have bought them and received them as presents--wild cats, jackals,
panthers, the wild dog, the two best lions now in the Zoological
Gardens, monkeys innumerable and of all sorts, and mongoose. I cannot
say that I distinctly recollect any pets among the _lowest_ orders
of men that I met with, such as the Denkas, but I am sure they exist,
and in this way. When I was on the White Nile and at Khartoum, very
few merchants went up the White Nile; none had stations. They were
little known to the natives; but none returned without some live
animal or bird which they had procured from them. While I was at
Khartoum, there came an Italian wild beast showman, after the
Wombwell style. He made a tour of the towns up to Doul and Fazogly,
Kordofan and the peninsula, and collected a large number of animals.
Thus my opinion distinctly is, that negroes do keep wild animals
alive. _I am sure of it_; though I can only vaguely recollect them
in one or two cases. I remember some chief in Abyssinia who had a
pet lion which he used to tease, and I have often seen monkeys about
huts."

[Equatorial Africa.]--The most remarkable instance I have met with
in modern Africa is the account of a menagerie that existed up to
the beginning of the reign of the present king of the Wahumas, on
the shores of Lake Nyanza. Suna, the great despot of that country,
reigned till 1857. Captains Burton and Speke were in the
neighbourhood in the following year, and Captain Burton thus
describes (_Journal R. G. Soc._, xxix. 282) the report he received
of Suna's collection:--

"He had a large menagerie of lions, elephants, leopards, and similar
beasts of disport; he also kept for amusement fifteen or sixteen
albinos; and so greedy was he of novelty, that even a cock of
peculiar form or colour would have been forwarded by its owner to
feed his eyes."

Captain Speke, in his subsequent journey to the Nile, passed many
months at Uganda, as the guest of Suna's youthful successor, M'tese.
The fame of the old menagerie was fresh when Captain Speke was there.
He wrote to me as follows concerning it:--

"I was told Suna kept buffaloes, antelopes, and animals of all
colours' (meaning 'sorts'), and in equal quantities.  M'tese, his son,
no sooner came to the throne, than he indulged in shooting them down
before his admiring wives, and now he has only one buffalo and a few
parrots left."

In Kouka, near Lake Tchad, antelopes and ostriches are both kept tame,
as I was informed by Dr. Barth.

[South Africa.]--The instances are very numerous in South Africa
where the Boers and half-castes amuse themselves with rearing zebras,
antelopes, and the like; but I have not found many instances among
the native races. Those that are best known to us are mostly nomad
and in a chronic state of hunger, and therefore disinclined to
nurture captured animals as pets; nevertheless, some instances can
be adduced. Livingstone alludes to an extreme fondness for small
tame singing-birds (pp. 324 and 453). Dr. (now Sir John) Kirk, who
accompanied him in later years, mentions guinea-fowl--that do not
breed in confinement, and are merely kept as pets--in the Shire
valley, and Mr. Oswell has furnished me with one similar anecdote. I
feel, however, satisfied that abundant instances could be found if
properly sought for. It was the frequency with which I recollect to
have heard of tamed animals when I myself was in South Africa,
though I never witnessed any instance, that first suggested to me
the arguments of the present paper. Sir John Kirk informs me that:

"As you approach the coast or Portuguese settlements, pets of all
kinds become very common; but then the opportunity of occasionally
selling them to advantage may help to increase the number; still,
the more settled life has much to do with it."

In confirmation of this view, I will quote an early writer,
Pigafetta (_Hakluyt Coll._, ii. 562), on the South African kingdom
of Congo, who found a strange medley of animals in captivity, long
before the demands of semi-civilisation had begun to prompt their
collection:--

The King of Congo, on being Christianised by the Jesuit missionaries
in the sixteenth century, "signified that whoever had any idols
should deliver them to the lieutenants of the country. And within
less than a month all the idols which they worshipped were brought
into court, and certainly the number of these toys was infinite, for
every man adored what he liked without any measure or reason at all.
Some kept serpents of horrible figures, some worshipped the greatest
goats they could get, some leopards, and others monstrous creatures.
Some held in veneration certain unclean fowls, etc. Neither did they
content themselves with worshipping the said creatures when alive,
but also adored the very skins of them when they were dead and
stuffed with straw."

[Australia.]--Mr. Woodfield records the following touching anecdote
in a paper communicated to the Ethnological Society, as occurring in
an unsettled part of West Australia, where the natives rank as the
lowest race upon the earth:--

"During the summer of 1858-9 the Murchison river was visited by
great numbers of kites, the native country of these birds being
Shark's Bay. As other birds were scarce, we shot many of these kites,
merely for the sake of practice, the natives eagerly devouring them
as fast as they were killed. One day a man and woman, natives of
Shark's Bay, came to the Murchison, and the woman immediately
recognising the birds as coming from her country, assured us that
the natives there never kill them, and that they are so tame that
they will perch on the shoulders of the women and eat from their
hands. On seeing one shot she wept bitterly, and not even the offer
of the bird could assuage her grief, for she absolutely refused to
eat it. No more kites were shot while she remained among us."

The Australian women habitually feed the puppies they intend to rear
from their own breasts, and show an affection to them equal, if not
exceeding, that to their own infants. Sir Charles Nicholson informs
me that he has known an extraordinary passion for cats to be
demonstrated by Australian women at Fort Phillip.

[New Guinea Group.]--Captain Develyn is reported (Bennett,
_Naturalist in Australia_, p. 244) to say of the island of New
Britain, near Australia, that the natives consider cassowaries "to a
certain degree sacred, and rear them as pets. They carry them in their
arms, and entertain a great affection for them."

Professor Huxley informs me that he has seen sucking-pigs nursed at
the breasts of women, apparently as pets, in islands of the New
Guinea Group.

[Polynesia.]--The savage and cannibal Fijians were no exceptions to
the general rule, for Dr. Seemann wrote me word that they make pets
of the flying fox (bat), the lizard, and parroquet. Captain Wilkes,
in his exploring expedition (ii. 122), says the pigeon in the Samoon
islands "is commonly kept as a plaything, and particularly by the
chiefs. One of our officers unfortunately on one occasion shot a
pigeon, which caused great commotion, for the bird was a king pigeon,
and to kill it was thought as great a crime as to take the life of a
man."

Mr. Ellis, writing of these islands (_Polynesian Researches_, ii. 285),
says:--

"Eels are great favourites, and are tamed and fed till they attain
an enormous size. Taoarii had several in different parts of the
island. These pets were kept in large holes, two or three feet deep,
partially filled with water. I have been several times with the
young chief, when he has sat down by the side of the hole, and by
giving a shrill sort of whistle, has brought out an enormous eel,
which has moved about the surface of the water and eaten with
confidence out of his master's hand."

[Syria.]--I will conclude this branch of my argument by quoting the
most ancient allusion to a pet that I can discover in writing,
though some of the Egyptian pictured representations are
considerably older. It is the parable spoken by the Prophet Samuel
to King David, that is expressed in the following words:--

"The poor man had nothing save one little ewe lamb, which he had
bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him and with
his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup,
and lay in his bosom, and was to him as a daughter."

We will now turn to the next stage of our argument. Not only do
savages rear animals as pets, but communities maintain them as sacred.
The ox of India and the brute gods of Egypt occur to us at once; the
same superstition prevails widely. The quotation already given from
Pigafetta is in point; the fact is too well known to readers of
travel to make it necessary to devote space to its proof. I will
therefore simply give a graphic account, written by M. Jules Gerard,
of Whydah in West Africa:--

"I visited the Temple of Serpents in this town, where thirty of
these monstrous deities were asleep in various attitudes. Each day
at sunset, a priest brings them a certain number of sheep, goats,
fowls, etc., which are slaughtered in the temple and then divided
among the 'gods.' Subsequently during the night they (? the priests)
spread themselves about the town, entering the houses in various
quarters in search of further offerings. It is forbidden under
penalty of death to kill, wound, or even strike one of these sacred
serpents, or any other of the same species, and only the priests
possess the privilege of taking hold of them, for the purpose of
reinstating them in the temple should they be found elsewhere."

It would be tedious and unnecessary to adduce more instances of wild
animals being nurtured in the encampments of savages, either as pets
or as sacred animals. It will be found on inquiry that few travellers
have failed altogether to observe them. If we consider the small number
of encampments they severally visited in their line of march, compared
with the vast number that are spread over the whole area, which is or
has been inhabited by rude races, we may obtain some idea of the
thousands of places at which half-unconscious attempts at domestication
are being made in each year. These thousands must themselves be multiplied
many thousandfold, if we endeavour to calculate the number of similar
attempts that have been made since men like ourselves began to inhabit
the world.

My argument, strong as it is, admits of being considerably
strengthened by the following consideration:--

The natural inclination of barbarians is often powerfully reinforced
by an enormous demand for captured live animals on the part of their
more civilised neighbours. A desire to create vast hunting-grounds
and menageries and amphitheatrical shows, seems naturally to occur
to the monarchs who preside over early civilisations, and travellers
continually remark that, whenever there is a market for live animals,
savages will supply them in any quantities. The means they employ to
catch game for their daily food readily admits of their taking them
alive. Pit-falls, stake-nets, and springes do not kill. If the
savage captures an animal unhurt, and can make more by selling it
alive than dead, he will doubtless do so. He is well fitted by
education to keep a wild animal in captivity. His mode of pursuing
game requires a more intimate knowledge of the habits of beasts than
is ever acquired by sportsmen who use more perfect weapons. A savage
is obliged to steal upon his game, and to watch like a jackal for
the leavings of large beasts of prey. His own mode of life is akin
to that of the creatures he hunts. Consequently, the savage is a
good gamekeeper; captured animals thrive in his charge, and he finds
it remunerative to take them a long way to market. The demands of
ancient Rome appear to have penetrated Northern Africa as far or
farther than the steps of our modern explorers. The chief centres of
import of wild animals were Egypt, Assyria (and other Eastern
monarchies), Rome, Mexico, and Peru. I have not yet been able to
learn what were the habits of Hindostan or China. The modern
menagerie of Lucknow is the only considerable native effort in those
parts with which I am acquainted.

[Egypt.]--The mutilated statistical tablet of Karnak (_Trans. R. Soc.
Lit._, 1847, p. 369, and 1863, p. 65) refers to an armed invasion of
Armenia by Thothmes III., and the payment of a large tribute of
antelopes and birds. When Ptolemy Philadelphus feted the
Alexandrians (_Athenoeus_, v.), the Ethiopians brought dogs,
buffaloes, bears, leopards, lynxes, a giraffe, and a rhinoceros.
Doubtless this description of gifts was common. Live beasts are the
one article of curiosity and amusement that barbarians can offer to
civilised nations.

[Assyria.]--Mr. Fox Talbot thus translates (_Journal Asiatic Soc._,
xix. 124) part of the inscription on the black obelisk of Ashurakbal
found in Nineveh and now in the British Museum:--

"He caught in hunter's toils (a blank number) of armi, turakhi, nali,
and yadi. Every one of these animals he placed in separate enclosures.
He brought up their young ones and counted them as carefully as
young lambs. As to the creatures called burkish, utrati (dromedaries?),
tishani, and dagari, he wrote for them and they came. The
dromedaries he kept in enclosures, where he brought up their young
ones. He entrusted each kind of animal to men of their own country to
tend them. There were also curious animals of the Mediterranean Sea,
which the King of Egypt sent as a gift and entrusted to the care of
men of their own land. The very choicest animals were there in
abundance, and birds of heaven with beautiful wings. It was a
splendid menagerie, and all the work of his own hands. The names of
the animals were placed beside them."

[Rome.]--The extravagant demands for the amphitheatre of ancient
Rome must have stimulated the capture of wild animals in Asia, Africa,
and the then wild parts of Europe, to an extraordinary extent. I
will quote one instance from Gibbon:--

"By the order of Probus, a vast quantity of large trees torn up by
the roots were transplanted into the midst of the circus. The
spacious and shady forest was immediately filled with a thousand
ostriches, a thousand stags, a thousand fallow-deer, and a thousand
wild boars, and all this variety of game was abandoned to the
riotous impetuosity of the multitude. The tragedy of the succeeding
day consisted in the massacre of a hundred lions, an equal number of
lionesses, two hundred leopards, and three hundred bears."

Farther on we read of a spectacle by the younger Gordian of
"twenty zebras, ten elks, ten giraffes, thirty African hyenas, ten
Indian tigers, a rhinoceros, an hippopotamus, and thirty-two
elephants."

[Mexico.]--Gomara, the friend and executor of Herman Cortes, states:
--

"There were here also many cages made of stout beams, in some of
which there were lions (pumas); in others, tigers (jaguars); in
others, ounces; in others, wolves; nor was there any animal on four
legs that was not there. They had for their rations deer and other
animals of the chase. There were also kept in large jars or tanks,
snakes, alligators, and lizards. In another court there were cages
containing every kind of birds of prey, such as vultures, a dozen
sorts of falcons and hawks, eagles, and owls. The large eagles
received turkeys for their food. Our Spaniards were astonished at
seeing such a diversity of birds and beasts; nor did they find it
pleasant to hear the hissing of the poisonous snakes, the roaring of
the lions, the shrill cries of the wolves, nor the groans of the
other animals given to them for food."

[Peru.]--Garcilasso de la Vega (_Commentaries Reales_, v. 10), the
son of a Spanish conqueror by an Indian princess, born and bred in
Peru, writes:--

"All the strange birds and beasts which the chiefs presented to the
Inca were kept at court, both for grandeur and also to please the
Indians who presented them. When I came to Cuzco, I remember there
were some remains of places where they kept these creatures. One was
the serpent conservatory, and another where they kept the pumas,
jaguars, and bears."

[Syria and Greece.]--I could have said something on Solomon's apes
and peacocks, and could have quoted at length the magnificent order
given by Alexander the Great (Pliny, _Nat. Hist._, viii. 16) towards
supplying material for Aristotle's studies in natural history; but
enough has been said to prove what I maintained, namely, that
numerous cases occur, year after year, and age after age, in which
every animal of note is captured and its capabilities of
domestication unconsciously tested.

I would accept in a more stringent sense than it was probably
intended to bear, the text of St. James, who wrote at a time when a
vast variety and multitude of animals were constantly being
forwarded to Rome and to Antioch for amphitheatrical shows. He says
(James iii. 7), "Every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents,
and of things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind."

I conclude from what I have stated that there is no animal worthy of
domestication that has not frequently been captured, and might ages
ago have established itself as a domestic breed, had it not been
deficient in certain necessary particulars which I shall proceed to
discuss. These are numerous and so stringent as to leave no ground
for wonder that out of the vast abundance of the animal creation,
only a few varieties of a few species should have become the
companions of man.

It by no means follows that because a savage cares to take home a
young fawn to amuse himself, his family, and his friends, that he
will always continue to feed or to look after it. Such attention
would require a steadiness of purpose foreign to the ordinary
character of a savage. But herein lie two shrewd tests of the
eventual destiny of the animal as a domestic species.

_Hardiness_.--It must be able to shift for itself and to thrive,
although it is neglected; since, if it wanted much care, it would
never be worth its keep.

The hardiness of our domestic animals is shown by the rapidity with
which they establish themselves in new lands. The goats and hogs
left on islands by the earlier navigators throve excellently on the
whole. The horse has taken possession of the Pampas, and the sheep
and ox of Australia. The dog is hardly repressible in the streets of
an Oriental town.

_Fondness of Man_.--Secondly, it must cling to man, notwithstanding
occasional hard usage and frequent neglect. If the animal had no
natural attachment to our species, it would fret itself to death, or
escape and revert to wildness. It is easy to find cases where the
partial or total non-fulfilment of this condition is a corresponding
obstacle to domestication. Some kinds of cattle are too precious to
be discarded, but very troublesome to look after. Such are the
reindeer to the Lapps. Mr. Campbell of Islay informed me that the
tamest of certain herds of them look as if they were wild; they have
to be caught with a lasso to be milked. If they take fright, they
are off to the hills; consequently the Lapps are forced to
accommodate themselves to the habits of their beasts, and to follow
them from snow to sea and from sea to snow at different seasons. The
North American reindeer has never been domesticated, owing, I presume,
to this cause. The Peruvian herdsmen would have had great trouble to
endure had the llama and alpaca not existed, for their cogeners, the
huanacu and the vicuna, are hardly to be domesticated.

Zebras, speaking broadly, are unmanageable. The Dutch Boers
constantly endeavour to break them to harness, and though they
occasionally succeed to a degree, the wild mulish nature of the
animal is always breaking out, and liable to balk them.

It is certain that some animals have naturally a greater fondness
for man than others; and as a proof of this, I will again quote
Hearne about the moose, who are considered by him to be the easiest
to tame and domesticate of any of the deer tribe. Formerly the
closely-allied European elks were domesticated in Sweden, and used
to draw sledges, as they are now occasionally in Canada; but they
have been obsolete for many years. Hearne says:--

"The young ones are so simple that I remember to have seen an Indian
paddle his canoe up to one of them, and take it by the poll, without
experiencing the least opposition, the poor harmless animal seeming
at the same time as contented alongside the canoe as if swimming by
the side of its dam, and looking up in our faces with the same
fearless innocence that a house lamb would."

On the other hand, a young bison will try to dash out its brains
against the tree to which it is tied, in terror and hatred of its
captors.

It is interesting to note the causes that conduce to a decided
attachment of certain animals to man, or between one kind of animal
and another. It is notorious that attachments and aversions exist in
nature. Swallows, rooks, and storks frequent dwelling houses;
ostriches and zebras herd together; so do bisons and elks. On the
other hand, deer and sheep, which are both gregarious, and both eat
the same food and graze within the same enclosure, avoid one another.
The spotted Danish dog, the Spitz dog, and the cat, have all a
strong attachment to horses, and horses seem pleased with their
company; but dogs and cats are proverbially discordant. I presume
that two species of animals do not consider one another companionable,
or clubable, unless their behaviour and their persons are
reciprocally agreeable. A phlegmatic animal would be exceedingly
disquieted by the close companionship of an excitable one. The
movements of one beast may have a character that is unpleasing to
the eyes of another; his cries may sound discordant; his smell may
be repulsive. Two herds of animals would hardly intermingle, unless
their respective languages of action and of voice were mutually
intelligible. The animal which above all others is a companion to
man is the dog, and we observe how readily their proceedings are
intelligible to each other. Every whine or bark of the dog, each of
his fawning, savage, or timorous movements is the exact counterpart
of what would have been the man's behaviour, had he felt similar
emotions. As the man understands the thoughts of the dog, so the dog
understands the thoughts of the man, by attending to his natural
voice, his countenance, and his actions. A man irritates a dog by an
ordinary laugh, he frightens him by an angry look, or he calms him
by a kindly bearing; but he has less spontaneous hold over an ox or a
sheep. He must study their ways and tutor his behaviour before he
can either understand the feelings of those animals or make his own
intelligible to them. He has no natural power at all over many other
creatures. Who, for instance, ever succeeded in frowning away a
mosquito, or in pacifying an angry wasp by a smile?

_Desire of Comfort_.--This is a motive which strongly attaches
certain animals to human habitations, even though they are unwelcome:
it is a motive which few persons who have not had an opportunity of
studying animals in savage lands are likely to estimate at its true
value. The life of all beasts in their wild state is an exceedingly
anxious one. From my own recollection, I believe that every antelope
in South Africa has to run for its life every one or two days upon
an average, and that he starts or gallops under the influence of a
false alarm many times in a day. Those who have crouched at night by
the side of pools in the desert, in order to have a shot at the
beasts that frequent them, see strange scenes of animal life; how
the creatures gambol at one moment and fight at another; how a herd
suddenly halts in strained attention, and then breaks into a
maddened rush, as one of them becomes conscious of the stealthy
movements or rank scent of a beast of prey. Now this hourly
life-and-death excitement is a keen delight to most wild creatures,
but must be peculiarly distracting to the comfort-loving temperament
of others. The latter are alone suited to endure the crass habits
and dull routine of domesticated life. Suppose that an animal which
has been captured and half-tamed, received ill-usage from his captors,
either as punishment or through mere brutality, and that he rushed
indignantly into the forest with his ribs aching from blows and
stones. If a comfort-loving animal, he will probably be no gainer by
the change, more serious alarms and no less ill-usage awaits him; he
hears the roar of the wild beasts and the headlong gallop of the
frightened herds, and he finds the buttings and the kicks of other
animals harder to endure than the blows from which he fled. He has
the disadvantage of being a stranger, for the herds of his own
species which he seeks for companionship constitute so many cliques,
into which he can only find admission by more fighting with their
strongest members than he has spirit to undergo. As a set-off
against these miseries, the freedom of savage life has no charms for
his temperament; so the end of it is, that with a heavy heart he
turns back to the habitation he had quitted. When animals thoroughly
enjoy the excitement of wild life, I presume they cannot be
domesticated, they could only be tamed, for they would never return
from the joys of the wilderness after they had once tasted them
through some accidental wandering.

Gallinas, or guinea-fowl, have so little care for comfort, or indeed
for man, that they fall but a short way within the frontier of
domestication. It is only in inclement seasons that they take
contentedly to the poultry-yards.

Elephants, from their size and power, are not dependent on man for
protection; hence, those that have been reared as pets from the time
they were calves, and have never learned to dread and obey the
orders of a driver, are peculiarly apt to revert to wildness if they
once are allowed to wander and escape to the woods. I believe this
tendency, together with the cost of maintenance and the comparative
uselessness of the beasts, are among the chief causes why Africans
never tame them now; though they have not wholly lost the practice
of capturing them when full-grown, and of keeping them imprisoned
for some days alive. Mr. Winwood Reade's account of captured
elephants, seen by himself near Glass Town in Equatorial Western
Africa, is very curious.

_Usefulness to Man_.--To proceed with the list of requirements
which a captured animal must satisfy before it is possible he could
be permanently domesticated: there is the very obvious condition
that he should be useful to man; otherwise, in growing to maturity,
and losing the pleasing youthful ways which had first attracted his
captors and caused them to make a pet of him, he would be repelled.
As an instance in point, I will mention seals. Many years ago I used
to visit Shetland, when those animals were still common, and I heard
many stories of their being tamed: one will suffice:--A fisherman
caught a young seal; it was very affectionate, and frequented his hut,
fishing for itself in the sea. At length it grew self-willed and
unwieldy; it used to push the children and snap at strangers, and it
was voted a nuisance, but the people could not bear to kill it on
account of its human ways. One day the fisherman took it with him in
his boat, and dropped it in a stormy sea, far from home; the
stratagem was unsuccessful; in a day or two the well-known scuffling
sound of the seal, as it floundered up to the hut, was again heard;
the animal had found its way home. Some days after the poor creature
was shot by a sporting stranger, who saw it basking and did not know
it was tame. Now had the seal been a useful animal and not
troublesome, the fisherman would doubtless have caught others, and
set a watch over them to protect them; and then, if they bred freely
and were easy to tend, it is likely enough he would have produced a
domestic breed.

The utility of the animals as a store of future food is undoubtedly
the most durable reason for maintaining them; but I think it was
probably not so early a motive as the chief's pleasure in possessing
them. That was the feeling under which the menageries, described
above, were established. Whatever the despot of savage tribes is
pleased with becomes invested with a sort of sacredness. His tame
animals would be the care of all his people, who would become
skilful herdsmen under the pressure of fear. It would be as much as
their lives were worth if one of the creatures were injured through
their neglect. I believe that the keeping of a herd of beasts, with
the sole motive of using them as a reserve for food, or as a means
of barter, is a late idea in the history of civilisation. It has now
become established among the pastoral races of South Africa, owing
to the traffickings of the cattle-traders, but it was by no means
prevalent in Damara-Land when I travelled there in 1852. I then was
surprised to observe the considerations that induced the chiefs to
take pleasure in their vast herds of cattle. They were valued for
their stateliness and colour, far more than for their beef. They
were as the deer of an English squire, or as the stud of a man who
has many more horses than he can ride. An ox was almost a sacred
beast in Damara-Land, not to be killed except on momentous occasions,
and then as a sort of sacrificial feast, in which all bystanders
shared. The payment of two oxen was hush-money for the life of a man.
I was considerably embarrassed by finding that I had the greatest
trouble in buying oxen for my own use, with the ordinary articles of
barter. The possessor would hardly part with them for any
remuneration; they would never sell their handsomest beasts.

One of the ways in which the value of tamed beasts would be soon
appreciated would be that of giving milk to children. It is
marvellous how soon goats find out children and tempt them to suckle.
I have had the milk of my goats, when encamping for the night in
African travels, drained dry by small black children, who had not
the strength to do more than crawl about, but nevertheless came to
some secret understanding with the goats and fed themselves. The
records of many nations have legends like that of Romulus and Remus,
who are stated to have been suckled by wild beasts. These are
surprisingly confirmed by General Sleeman's narrative of six cases
where children were nurtured for many years by wolves in Oude.
(_Journey through Oude in 1849-50_, i. 206.)

_Breeding freely_.--Domestic animals must breed freely under
confinement. This necessity limits very narrowly the number of
species which might otherwise have been domesticated. It is one of
the most important of all the conditions that have to be satisfied.
The North American turkey, reared from the eggs of the wild bird, is
stated to be unknown in the third generation, in captivity. Our
turkey comes from Mexico, and was abundantly domesticated by the
ancient Mexicans.

The Indians of the Upper Amazon took turtle and placed them in
lagoons for use in seasons of scarcity. The Spaniards who first saw
them called these turtle "Indian cattle." They would certainly have
become domesticated like cattle, if they had been able to breed in
captivity.

_Easy to tend_.--They must be tended easily. When animals reared
in the house are suffered to run about in the companionship of
others like themselves, they naturally revert to much of their
original wildness. It is therefore essential to domestication that
they should possess some quality by which large numbers of them may
be controlled by a few herdsmen. The instinct of gregariousness is
such a quality. The herdsman of a vast troop of oxen grazing in a
forest, so long as he is able to see one of them, knows pretty
surely that they are all within reach. If oxen are frightened and
gallop off, they do not scatter, but remain in a single body. When
animals are not gregarious, they are to the herdsman like a falling
necklace of beads whose string is broken, or as a handful of water
escaping between the fingers.

The cat is the only non-gregarious domestic animal. It is retained
by its extraordinary adhesion to the comforts of the house in which
it is reared.

An animal may be perfectly fitted to be a domestic animal, and be
peculiarly easy to tend in a general way, and yet the circumstances
in which the savages are living may make it too troublesome for them
to maintain a breed. The following account, taken from Mr. Scott
Nind's paper on the Natives of King George's Sound in Australia, and
printed in the first volume of the _Journal of the Geographical
Society_, is particularly to the point. He says:--

"In the chase the hunters are assisted by dogs, which they take when
young and domesticate; but they take little pains to train them to
any particular mode of hunting. After finding a litter of young, the
natives generally carry away one or two to rear; in this case, it
often occurs that the mother will trace and attack them; and, being
large and very strong, she is rather formidable. At some periods,
food is so scanty as to compel the dog to leave his master and
provide for himself; but in a few days he generally returns."

I have also evidence that this custom is common to the wild natives
of other parts of Australia.

The gregariousness of all our domestic species is, I think, the
primary reason why some of them are extinct in a wild state. The
wild herds would intermingle with the tame ones, some would become
absorbed, the others would be killed by hunters, who used the tame
cattle as a shelter to approach the wild. Besides this,
comfort-loving animals would be less suited to fight the battle of
life with the rest of the brute creation; and it is therefore to be
expected that those varieties which are best fitted for domestication,
would be the soonest extinguished in a wild state. For instance, we
could hardly fancy the camel to endure in a land where there were
large wild beasts.

_Selection_.--The irreclaimably wild members of every flock would
escape and be utterly lost; the wilder of those that remained would
assuredly be selected for slaughter, when ever it was necessary that
one of the flock should be killed. The tamest cattle--those that
seldom ran away, that kept the flock together and led them
homewards--would be preserved alive longer than any of the others.
It is therefore these that chiefly become the parents of stock, and
bequeath their domestic aptitudes to the future herd. I have
constantly witnessed this process of selection among the pastoral
savages of South Africa. I believe it to be a very important one, on
account of its rigour and its regularity. It must have existed from
the earliest times, and have been in continuous operation,
generation after generation, down to the present day.

_Exceptions_.--I have already mentioned the African elephant, the
North American reindeer, and the apparent, but not real exception of
the North American turkey. I should add the ducks and geese of North
America, but I cannot consider them in the light of a very strong
case, for a savage who constantly changes his home is not likely to
carry aquatic birds along with him. Beyond these few, I know of no
notable exceptions to my theory.

_Summary_.

I see no reason to suppose that the first domestication of any animal,
except the elephant, implies a high civilisation among the people
who established it. I cannot believe it to have been the result of a
preconceived intention, followed by elaborate trials, to administer
to the comfort of man. Neither can I think it arose from one
successful effort made by an individual, who might thereby justly
claim the title of benefactor to his race; but, on the contrary,
that a vast number of half-unconscious attempts have been made
throughout the course of ages, and that ultimately, by slow degrees,
after many relapses, and continued selection, our several domestic
breeds became firmly established.

I will briefly restate what appear to be the conditions under which
wild animals may become domesticated:--1, they should be hardy; 2,
they should have an inborn liking for man; 3, they should be
comfort-loving; 4, they should be found useful to the savages; 5,
they should breed freely; 6, they should be easy to tend. It would
appear that every wild animal has had its chance of being
domesticated, that those few which fulfilled the above conditions
were domesticated long ago, but that the large remainder, who fail
sometimes in only one small particular, are destined to perpetual
wildness so long as their race continues. As civilisation extends
they are doomed to be gradually destroyed off the face of the earth
as useless consumers of cultivated produce. I infer that slight
differences in natural dispositions of human races may in one case
lead irresistibly to some particular career, and in another case may
make that career an impossibility.




THE OBSERVED ORDER OF EVENTS.

There is nothing as yet observed in the order of events to make us
doubt that the universe is bound together in space and time, as a
single entity, and there is a concurrence of many observed facts to
induce us to accept that view. We may, therefore, not unreasonably
profess faith in a common and mysterious whole, and of the laborious
advance, under many restrictions, of that infinitely small part of
it which falls under our observation, but which is in itself
enormously large, and behind which lies the awful mystery of the
origin of all existence.

The conditions that direct the order of the whole of the living
world around us, are marked by their persistence in improving the
birthright of successive generations. They determine, at much cost
of individual comfort, that each plant and animal shall, on the
general average, be endowed at its birth with more suitable natural
faculties than those of its representative in the preceding
generation. They ensure, in short, that the inborn qualities of the
terrestrial tenantry shall become steadily better adapted to their
homes and to their mutual needs. This effect, be it understood, is
not only favourable to the animals who live long enough to become
parents, but is also favourable to those who perish in earlier life,
because even they are on the whole better off during their brief
career than if they had been born still less adapted to the
conditions of their existence. If we summon before our imagination
in a single mighty host, the whole number of living things from the
earliest date at which terrestrial life can be deemed to have
probably existed, to the latest future at which we may think it can
probably continue, and if we cease to dwell on the miscarriages of
individual lives or of single generations, we shall plainly perceive
that the actual tenantry of the world progresses in a direction that
may in some sense be described as the greatest happiness of the
greatest number.

We also remark that while the motives by which individuals in the
lowest stages are influenced are purely self regarding, they broaden
as evolution goes on. The word "self" ceases to be wholly personal,
and begins to include subjects of affection and interest, and these
become increasingly numerous as intelligence and depth of character
develop, and as civilisation extends. The sacrifice of the personal
desire for repose to the performance of domestic and social duties
is an everyday event with us, and other sacrifices of the smaller to
the larger self are by no means uncommon. Life in general may be
looked upon as a republic where the individuals are for the most
part unconscious that while they are working for themselves they are
also working for the public good.

We may freely confess ignorance of the outcome in the far future of
that personal life to which we each cling passionately in the joyous
morning of the affections, but which, as these and other interests
fail, does not seem so eminently desirable in itself. We know that
organic life can hardly be expected to flourish on this earth of
ours for so long a time as it has already existed, because the sun
will in all probability have lost too much of its heat and light by
then, and will have begun to grow dark and therefore cold, as other
stars have done. The conditions of existence here, which are now
apparently in their prime, will have become rigorous and
increasingly so, and there will be retrogression towards lower types,
until the simplest form of life shall have wholly disappeared from
the ice-bound surface. The whole living world will then have waxed
and waned like an individual life.

Neither can we discover whether organisms here are capable of
attaining the average development of organisms in other of the
planets that are probably circling round most of the myriads of stars,
whose physical constitution, where-ever it has as yet been observed
spectroscopically, does not differ much from that of our sun. But we
perceive around us a countless number of abortive seeds and germs; we
find out of any group of a thousand men selected at random, some who
are crippled, insane, idiotic, and otherwise born incurably
imperfect in body or mind, and it is possible that this world may
rank among other worlds as one of these.

We as yet understand nothing of the way in which our conscious
selves are related to the separate lives of the billions of cells of
which the body of each of us is composed. We only know that the
cells form a vast nation, some members of which are always dying and
others growing to supply their places, and that the continual
sequence of these multitudes of little lives has its outcome in the
larger and conscious life of the man as a whole. Our part in the
universe may possibly in some distant way be analogous to that of
the cells in an organised body, and our personalities may be the
transient but essential elements of an immortal and cosmic mind.

Our views of the object of life have to be framed so as not to be
inconsistent with the observed facts from which these various
possibilities are inferred; it is safer that they should not exclude
the possibilities themselves. We must look on the slow progress of
the order of evolution, and the system of routine by which it has
thus far advanced, as due to antecedents and to inherent conditions
of which we have not as yet the slightest conception. It is
difficult to withstand a suspicion that the three dimensions of
space and the fourth dimension of time may be four independent
variables of a system that is neither space nor time, but something
else wholly unconceived by us. Our present enigma as to how a First
Cause could itself have been brought into existence--how the
tortoise of the fable, that bears the elephant that bears the world,
is itself supported,--may be wholly due to our necessary
mistranslation of the four or more variables of the universe,
limited by inherent conditions, into the three unlimited variables
of Space and the one of Time.

Our ignorance of the goal and purport of human life, and the
mistrust we are apt to feel of the guidance of the spiritual sense,
on account of its proved readiness to accept illusions as realities,
warn us against deductive theories of conduct. Putting these, then,
at least for the moment, to one side, we find ourselves face to face
with two great and indisputable facts that everywhere force
themselves on the attention and compel consideration. The one is
that the whole of the living world moves steadily and continuously
towards the evolution of races that are progressively more and more
adapted to their complicated mutual needs and to their external
circumstances. The other is that the process of evolution has been
hitherto apparently carried out with, what we should reckon in our
ways of carrying out projects, great waste of opportunity and of life,
and with little if any consideration for individual mischance.
Measured by our criterion of intelligence and mercy, which consists
in the achievement of result without waste of time or opportunity,
without unnecessary pain, and with equitable allowance for pure
mistake, the process of evolution on this earth, so far as we can
judge, has been carried out neither with intelligence nor ruth, but
entirely through the routine of various sequences, commonly called
"laws," established or necessitated we know not how.

An incalculable amount of lower life has been certainly passed
through before that human organisation was attained, of which we and
our generation are for the time the holders and transmitters. This
is no mean heritage, and I think it should be considered as a sacred
trust, for, together with man, intelligence of a sufficiently high
order to produce great results appears, so far as we can infer from
the varied records of the prehistoric past, to have first dawned upon
the tenantry of the earth. Man has already shown his large power in
the modifications he has made on the surface of the globe, and in
the distribution of plants and animals. He has cleared such vast
regions of forest that his work that way in North America alone,
during the past half century, would be visable to an observer as far
off as the moon. He has dug and drained; he has exterminated plants
and animals that were mischievous to him; he has domesticated those
that serve his purpose, and transplanted them to great distances
from their native places. Now that this new animal man, finds
himself somehow in existence, endowed with a little power and
intelligence, he ought, I submit, to awake to a fuller knowledge of
his relatively great position, and begin to assume a deliberate part
in furthering the great work of evolution. He may infer the course
it is bound to pursue, from his observation of that which it has
already followed, and he might devote his modicum of power,
intelligence, and kindly feeling to render its future progress less
slow and painful. Man has already furthered evolution very
considerably, half unconsciously, and for his own personal advantages,
but he has not yet risen to the conviction that it is his religious
duty to do so deliberately and systematically.




SELECTION AND RACE.

The fact of an individual being naturally gifted with high qualities,
may be due either to his being an exceptionally good specimen of a
poor race, or an average specimen of a high one. The difference of
origin would betray itself in his descendants; they would revert
towards the typical centre of their race, deteriorating in the first
case but not in the second. The two cases, though theoretically
distinct, are confused in reality, owing to the frequency with which
exceptional personal qualities connote the departure of the entire
nature of the individual from his ancestral type, and the formation
of a new strain having its own typical centre. It is hardly
necessary to add that it is in this indirect way that natural
selection improves a race. The two events of selection and
difference of race ought, however, to be carefully distinguished in
broad practical considerations, while the frequency of their
concurrence is borne in mind and allowed for.

So long as the race remains radically the same, the stringent
selection of the best specimens to rear and breed from, can never
lead to any permanent result. The attempt to raise the standard of
such a race is like the labour of Sisyphus in rolling his stone
uphill; let the effort be relaxed for a moment, and the stone will
roll back. Whenever a new typical centre appears, it is as though
there was a facet upon the lower surface of the stone, on which it
is capable of resting without rolling back. It affords a temporary
sticking-point in the forward progress of evolution. The causes that
check the unlimited improvement of highly-bred animals, so long as
the race remains unchanged, are many and absolute.

In the first place there is an increasing delicacy of constitution;
the growing fineness of limb and structure end, after a few
generations, in fragility. Overbred animals have little stamina;
they resemble in this respect the "weedy" colts so often reared from
first-class racers. One can perhaps see in a general way why this
should be so. Each individual is the outcome of a vast number of
organic elements of the most various species, just as some nation
might be the outcome of a vast number of castes of individuals, each
caste monopolising a special pursuit. Banish a number of the humbler
castes--the bakers, the bricklayers, and the smiths, and the nation
would soon come to grief. This is what is done in high breeding;
certain qualities are bred for, and the rest are diminished as far
as possible, but they cannot be dispensed with entirely.

The next difficulty lies in the diminished fertility of highly-bred
animals. It is not improbable that its cause is of the same
character as that of the delicacy of their constitution. Together
with infertility is combined some degree of sexual indifference, or
when passion is shown, it is not unfrequently for some specimen of a
coarser type. This is certainly the case with horses and with dogs.

It will be easily understood that these difficulties, which are so
formidable in the case of plants and animals, which we can mate as
we please and destroy when we please, would make the maintenance of
a highly-selected breed of men an impossibility.

Whenever a low race is preserved under conditions of life that exact
a high level of efficiency, it must be subjected to rigorous
selection. The few best specimens of that race can alone be allowed
to become parents, and not many of their descendants can be allowed
to live. On the other hand, if a higher race be substituted for the
low one, all this terrible misery disappears. The most merciful form
of what I ventured to call "eugenics" would consist in watching for
the indications of superior strains or races, and in so favouring
them that their progeny shall outnumber and gradually replace that
of the old one. Such strains are of no infrequent occurrence. It is
easy to specify families who are characterised by strong resemblances,
and whose features and character are usually prepotent over those of
their wives or husbands in their joint offspring, and who are at the
same time as prolific as the average of their class. These strains
can be conveniently studied in the families of exiles, which, for
obvious reasons, are easy to trace in their various branches.

The debt that most countries owe to the race of men whom they
received from one another as immigrants, whether leaving their
native country of their own free will, or as exiles on political or
religious grounds, has been often pointed out, and may, I think, be
accounted for as follows:--The fact of a man leaving his compatriots,
or so irritating them that they compel him to go, is fair evidence
that either he or they, or both, feel that his character is alien to
theirs. Exiles are also on the whole men of considerable force of
character; a quiet man would endure and succumb, he would not have
energy to transplant himself or to become so conspicuous as to be an
object of general attack. We may justly infer from this, that exiles
are on the whole men of exceptional and energetic natures, and it is
especially from such men as these that new strains of race are likely
to proceed.




INFLUENCE OF MAN UPON RACE.

The influence of man upon the nature of his own race has already
been very large, but it has not been intelligently directed, and has
in many instances done great harm. Its action has been by invasions
and migration of races, by war and massacre, by wholesale
deportation of population, by emigration, and by many social customs
which have a silent but widespread effect.

There exists a sentiment, for the most part quite unreasonable,
against the gradual extinction of an inferior race. It rests on some
confusion between the race and the individual, as if the destruction
of a race was equivalent to the destruction of a large number of men.
It is nothing of the kind when the process of extinction works
silently and slowly through the earlier marriage of members of the
superior race, through their greater vitality under equal stress,
through their better chances of getting a livelihood, or through
their prepotency in mixed marriages. That the members of an inferior
class should dislike being elbowed out of the way is another matter;
but it may be somewhat brutally argued that whenever two individuals
struggle for a single place, one must yield, and that there will be
no more unhappiness on the whole, if the inferior yield to the
superior than conversely, whereas the world will be permanently
enriched by the success of the superior. The conditions of happiness
are, however, too complex to be disposed of by _a priori_ argument;
it is safest to appeal to observation. I think it could be easily
shown that when the differences between the races is not so great as
to divide them into obviously different classes, and where their
language, education, and general interests are the same, the
substitution may take place gradually without any unhappiness. Thus
the movements of commerce have introduced fresh and vigorous blood
into various parts of England: the new-comers have intermarried with
the residents, and their characteristics have been prepotent in the
descendants of the mixed marriages. I have referred in the earlier
part of the book to the changes of type in the English nature that
have occurred during the last few hundred years. These have been
effected so silently that we only know of them by the results.

One of the most misleading of words is that of "aborigines." Its use
dates from the time when the cosmogony was thought to be young and
life to be of very recent appearance. Its usual meaning seems to be
derived from the supposition that nations disseminated themselves
like colonists from a common centre about four thousand years, say
120 generations ago, and thenceforward occupied their lands
undisturbed until the very recent historic period with which the
narrator deals, when some invading host drove out the "aborigines."
This idyllic view of the march of events is contradicted by ancient
sepulchral remains, by language, and by the habits of those modern
barbarians whose history we know. There are probably hardly any
spots on the earth that have not, within the last few thousand years,
been tenanted by very different races; none hardly that have not
been tenanted by very different tribes having the character of at
least sub-races.

The absence of a criterion to distinguish between races and sub-races,
and our ethnological ignorance generally, makes it impossible to
offer more than a very off-hand estimate of the average variety of
races in the different countries of the world. I have, however,
endeavoured to form one, which I give with much hesitation, knowing
how very little it is worth. I registered the usually recognised
races inhabiting each of upwards of twenty countries, and who at the
same time formed at least half per cent of the population. It was, I
am perfectly aware, a very rough proceeding, so rough that for the
United Kingdom I ignored the prehistoric types and accepted only the
three headings of British, Low Dutch, and Norman-French. Again, as
regards India I registered as follows:--Forest tribes (numerous),
Dravidian (three principal divisions), Early Arian, Tartar (numerous,
including Afghans), Arab, and lastly European, on account of their
political importance, notwithstanding the fewness of their numbers.
Proceeding in this off-hand way, and after considering the results,
the broad conclusion to which I arrived was that on the average at
least three different recognised races were to be found in every
moderately-sized district on the earth's surface. The materials were
far too scanty to enable any idea to be formed of the rate of change
in the relative numbers of the constituent races in each country,
and still less to estimate the secular changes of type in those races.

It may be well to take one or two examples of intermixture. Spain
was occupied in the earliest historic times by at least two races,
of whom we know very little; it was afterwards colonised here and
there by Phoenicians in its southern ports, and by Greeks in its
eastern. In the third century B.C. it was invaded by the
Carthaginians, who conquered and held a large part of it, but were
afterwards supplanted by the Romans, who ruled it more or less
completely for 700 years. It was invaded in the fifth century A.D.
by a succession of German tribes, and was finally completely overrun
by the Visigoths, who ruled it for more than 200 years. Then came
the invasion of the Moors, who rapidly conquered the whole of the
Peninsula up to the mountains of Asturias, where the Goths still held
their own, and whence they issued from time to time and ultimately
recovered the country. The present population consists of the
remnants of one or more tribes of ancient Iberians, of the still
more ancient Basques, and of relics of all the invaders who have
just been named. There is, besides, a notable proportion of Gypsies
and not a few Jews.

This is obviously a most heterogeneous mixture, but to fully
appreciate the diversity of its origin the several elements should
be traced farther back towards their sources. Thus, the Moors are
principally descendants of Arabs, who flooded the northern provinces
of Africa in successive waves of emigration eastwards, both before
and after the Hegira, partly combining with the Berbers as they went,
and partly displacing them from the littoral districts and driving
them to the oases of the Sahara, whence they in their turn displaced
the Negro population, whom they drove down to the Soudan. The Gypsies,
according to Sir Henry Rawlinson,[16] came from the Indo-Scythic
tribes who inhabited the mouths of the Indus, and began to migrate
northward, from the fourth century onward. They settled in the
Chaldean marshes, assumed independence and defied the caliph. In A.D.
831 the grandson of Haroun al-Raschid sent a large expedition
against them, which, after slaughtering ten thousand, deported the
whole of the remainder first to Baghdad and thence onwards to Persia.
They continued unmanageable in their new home, and were finally
transplanted to the Cilician frontier in Asia Minor, and established
there as a military colony to guard the passes of the Taurus. In A.D.
962 the Greeks, having obtained some temporary successes, drove the
Gypsies back more into the interior, whence they gradually moved
towards the Hellespont under the pressure of the advancing Seljukians,
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They then crossed over
to Europe and gradually overspread it, where they are now estimated
to number more than three millions.

[Footnote 16: _Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society_, vol.
i. This account of the routes of the Gypsies is by no means
universally accepted, nor, indeed, was offered as a complete
solution of the problem of their migration, but it will serve to
show how complex that problem is.]

It must not be supposed that emigration on a large scale implies
even a moderate degree of civilisation among those who emigrate,
because the process has been frequently traced among the more
barbarous tribes, to say nothing of the evidence largely derived
from ancient burial-places. My own impression of the races in South
Africa was one of a continual state of ferment and change, of the
rapid development of some clan here and of the complete or almost
complete suppression of another clan there. The well-known history
of the rise of the Zulus and the destruction of their neighbours is
a case in point. In the country with which I myself was familiar the
changes had been numerous and rapid in the preceding few years, and
there were undoubted signs of much more important substitutions of
race in bygone times. The facts were briefly these: Damara Land was
inhabited by pastoral tribes of the brown Bantu race who were in
continual war with various alternations of fortune, and the several
tribes had special characteristics that were readily appreciated by
themselves. On the tops of the escarped hills lived a fugitive black
people speaking a vile dialect of Hottentot, and families of yellow
Bushmen were found in the lowlands wherever the country was unsuited
for the pastoral Damaras. Lastly, the steadily encroaching Namaquas,
a superior Hottentot race, lived on the edge of the district. They
had very much more civilisation than the Bushmen, and more than the
Damaras, and they contained a large infusion of Dutch blood.

The interpretation of all this was obviously that the land had been
tenanted a long time ago by Negroes, that an invasion of Bushmen
drove the Negroes to the hills, and that the supremacy of these
lasted so long that the Negroes lost their own language and acquired
that of the Bushmen. Then an invasion of a tribe of Bantu race
supplanted the Bushmen, and the Bantus, after endless struggles among
themselves, were being pushed aside at the time I visited them by
the incoming Namaquas, who themselves are a mixed race. This is
merely a sample of Africa; everywhere there are evidences of
changing races.

The last 300 or 400 years, say the last ten generations of mankind,
have witnessed changes of population on the largest scale, by the
extension of races long resident in Europe to the temperate regions
of Asia, Africa, America, and Australasia.

Siberia was barely known to the Russians of nine generations ago,
but since that time it has been continuously overspread by their
colonists, soldiers, political exiles, and transported criminals;
already some two-thirds of its population are Sclaves.

In South Africa the settlement at the Cape of Good Hope is barely
six generations old, yet during that time a curious and continuous
series of changes has taken place, resulting in the substitution of
an alien population for the Hottentots in the south and the Bantus
in the north. One-third of it is white, consisting of Dutch, English,
descendants of French Huguenot refugees, some Germans and Portuguese,
and the remainder is a strange medley of Hottentot, Bantu, Malay,
and Negro elements. In North Africa Egypt has become infiltrated
with Greeks, Italians, Frenchmen, and Englishmen during the last two
generations, and Algeria with Frenchmen.

In North America the change has been most striking, from a sparse
Indian population of hunters into that of the present inhabitants of
the United States and Canada; the former of these, with its total of
fifty millions inhabitants, already contains more than forty-three
millions of whites, chiefly of English origin; that is more of
European blood than is to be found in any one of the five great
European kingdoms of England, France, Italy, Germany, and Austria,
and less than that of Russia alone. The remainder are chiefly black,
the descendants of slaves imported from Africa. In the Dominion of
Canada, with its much smaller population of four millions, there has
been a less, but still a complete, swamping of the previous Indian
element by incoming whites.

In South America, and thence upwards to Mexico inclusive, the
population has been infiltrated in some parts and transformed in
others, by Spanish blood and by that of the Negroes whom they
introduced, so that not one half of its population can be reckoned
as of pure Indian descent. The West Indian Islands have had their
population absolutely swept away since the time of the Spanish
Conquest, except in a few rare instances, and African Negroes have
been substituted for them.

Australia and New Zealand tell much the same tale as Canada. A
native population has been almost extinguished in the former and is
swamped in the latter, under the pressure of an immigrant population
of Europeans, which is now twelve times as numerous as the Maories.
The time during which this great change has been effected is less
than that covered by three generations.

To this brief sketch of changes of population in very recent periods,
I might add the wave of Arab admixture that has extended from Egypt
and the northern provinces of Africa into the Soudan, and that of
the yellow races of China, who have already made their industrial
and social influence felt in many distant regions, and who bid fair
hereafter, when certain of their peculiar religious fancies shall
have fallen into decay, to become one of the most effective of the
colonising nations, and who may, as I trust, extrude hereafter the
coarse and lazy Negro from at least the metaliferous regions of
tropical Africa.

It is clear from what has been said, that men of former generations
have exercised enormous influence over the human stock of the
present day, and that the average humanity of the world now and in
future years is and will be very different to what it would have
been if the action of our forefathers had been different. The power
in man of varying the future human stock vests a great responsibility
in the hands of each fresh generation, which has not yet been
recognised at its just importance, nor deliberately employed. It is
foolish to fold the hands and to say that nothing can be done,
inasmuch as social forces and self-interests are too strong to be
resisted. They need not be resisted; they can be guided. It is one
thing to check the course of a huge steam vessel by the shock of a
sudden encounter when she is going at full speed in the wrong
direction, and another to cause her to change her course slowly and
gently by a slight turn of the helm.

Nay, a ship may be made to describe a half circle, and to end by
following a course exactly opposite to the first, without attracting
the notice of the passengers.




POPULATION.

Over-population and its attendant miseries may not improbably become
a more serious subject of consideration than it ever yet has been,
owing to improved sanatation and consequent diminution of the
mortality of children, and to the filling up of the spare places of
the earth which are still void and able to receive the overflow of
Europe. There are no doubt conflicting possibilities which I need
not stop to discuss.

The check to over-population mainly advocated by Malthus is a
prudential delay in the time of marriage; but the practice of such a
doctrine would assuredly be limited, and if limited it would be most
prejudicial to the race, as I have pointed out in _Hereditary Genius_,
but may be permitted to do so again. The doctrine would only be
followed by the prudent and self-denying; it would be neglected by
the impulsive and self-seeking. Those whose race we especially want
to have, would leave few descendants, while those whose race we
especially want to be quit of, would crowd the vacant space with
their progeny, and the strain of population would thenceforward be
just as pressing as before. There would have been a little relief
during one or two generations, but no permanent increase of the
general happiness, while the race of the nation would have
deteriorated. The practical application of the doctrine of deferred
marriage would therefore lead indirectly to most mischievous results,
that were overlooked owing to the neglect of considerations bearing
on race. While criticising the main conclusion to which Malthus came,
I must take the opportunity of paying my humble tribute of admiration
to his great and original work, which seems to me like the rise of
a morning star before a day of free social investigation. There is
nothing whatever in his book that would be in the least offensive to
this generation, but he wrote in advance of his time and consequently
roused virulent attacks, notably from his fellow-clergymen, whose
doctrinaire notions upon the paternal dispensation of the world were
rudely shocked.

The misery check, as Malthus called all those influences that are
not prudential, is an ugly phrase not fully justified. It no doubt
includes death through inadequate food and shelter, through
pestilence from overcrowding, through war, and the like; but it also
includes many causes that do not deserve so hard a name. Population
decays under conditions that cannot be charged to the presence or
absence of misery, in the common sense of the word. These exist when
native races disappear before the presence of the incoming white man,
when after making the fullest allowances for imported disease, for
brandy drinking, and other assignable causes, there is always a
large residuum of effect not clearly accounted for. It is certainly
not wholly due to misery, but rather to listlessness, due to
discouragement, and acting adversely in many ways.

One notable result of dulness and apathy is to make a person
unattractive to the opposite sex and to be unattracted by them. It
is antagonistic to sexual affection, and the result is a diminution
of offspring. There exists strong evidence that the decay of
population in some parts of South America under the irksome tyranny
of the Jesuits, which crushed what little vivacity the people
possessed, was due to this very cause. One cannot fairly apply the
term "misery" to apathy; I should rather say that strong affections
restrained from marriage by prudential considerations more truly
deserved that name.




EARLY AND LATE MARRIAGES

It is important to obtain a just idea of the relative effects of
early and late marriages. I attempted this in _Hereditary Genius_,
but I think the following is a better estimate. We are unhappily
still deficient in collected data as regards the fertility of the
upper and middle classes at different ages; but the facts collected
by Dr. Matthews Duncan as regards the lower orders will serve our
purpose approximately, by furnishing the required _ratios_, though
not the absolute values. The following are his results,[17] from
returns kept at the Lying-in Hospital of St. Georges-in-the-East:--


  Age of Mother
 at her Marriage.   Average Fertility.
      15-19              9.12
      20-24              7.92
      25-29              6.30
      30-34              4.60


The meaning of this Table will be more clearly grasped after a
little modification of its contents. We may consider the fertility
of each group to refer to the medium age of that group, as by writing
17 instead of 15-19, and we may slightly smooth the figures, then
we have--


Age of Mother at her         Approximate average
    Marriage.                      Fertility.
       17                       9.00 = 6 x 1.5
       22                       7.50 = 5 x 1.5
       27                       6.00 = 4 x 1.5
       32                       4.50 = 3 x 1.5


Which shows that the relative fertility of mothers married at the
ages of 17, 22, 27, and 32 respectively is as 6, 5, 4, and 3
approximately.

The increase in population by a habit of early marriages is further
augmented by the greater rapidity with which the generations follow
each other. By the joint effect of these two causes, a large effect
is in time produced.

Let us compute a single example. Taking a group of 100 mothers
married at the age of 20, whom we will designate as A, and another
group of 100 mothers married at the age of 29, whom we will call B,
we shall find by interpolation that the fertility of A and B
respectively would be about 8.2 and 5.4. We need not, however,
regard their absolute fertility, which would differ in different
classes of society, but will only consider their relative production
of such female children as may live and become mothers, and we will
suppose the number of such descendants in the first generation to be
the same as that of the A and B mothers together[17]--namely, 200.
Then the number of such children in the A and B classes respectively,
being in the proportion of 8.2 to 5.4, will be 115 and 85.

[Footnote 17: _Fecundity, Fertility, Sterility_, etc.,
by Dr. Matthews Duncan. A. & C. Black: Edinburgh, 1871, p. 143.]

We have next to determine the average lengths of the A and B
generations, which may be roughly done by basing it on the usual
estimate of an average generation, irrespectively of sex, at a third
of a century, or say of an average female generation at 31.5 years.
We will further take 20 years as being 4.5 years earlier than the
average time of marriage, and 29 years as 4.5 years later than it,
so that the length of each generation of the A group will be 27 years,
and that of the B group will be 36 years. All these suppositions
appear to be perfectly fair and reasonable, while it may easily be
shown that any other suppositions within the bounds of probability
would lead to results of the same general order.

The least common multiple of 27 and 36 is 108, at the end of which
term of years A will have been multiplied four times over by the
factor 1.5, and B three times over by the factor 0.85. The results
are given in the following Table:--



            Number of Female Descendants who themselves
                            become Mothers.
======================================================================
After Number |            A             |          B                 |
of Years     | Of 100 Mothers whose     | Of 100 Mothers whose       |
as below.    | Marriages and those of   | Marriages and those of     |
             | their Daughters all take | their Daughters take       |
             | place at the Age of      | place at the Age of        |
             | 20 Years.                | 29 Years.                  |
             |          ---             |        ----                |
             | (Ratio of Increase in    | (Ratio of Decrease in      |
             |  each successive         | each successive Generation |
             |  Generation being 1.15.) | being 0.85.)               |
-------------+--------------------------+----------------------------|
    108      |            175           |            61              |
    216      |            299           |            38              |
    324      |            535           |            23              |
======================================================================


The general result is that the group B gradually disappears, and the
group A more than supplants it. Hence if the races best fitted to
occupy the land are encouraged to marry early, they will breed down
the others in a very few generations.




MARKS FOR FAMILY MERIT

It may seem very reasonable to ask how the result proposed in the
last paragraph is to be attained, and to add that the difficulty of
carrying so laudable a proposal into effect lies wholly in the
details, and therefore that until some working plan is suggested,
the consideration of improving the human race is Utopian. But this
requirement is not altogether fair, because if a persuasion of the
importance of any end takes possession of men's minds, sooner or
later means are found by which that end is carried into effect. Some
of the objections offered at first will be discovered to be
sentimental, and of no real importance--the sentiment will change
and they will disappear; others that are genuine are not met, but
are in some way turned or eluded; and lastly, through the ingenuity
of many minds directed for a long time towards the achievement of a
common purpose, many happy ideas are sure to be hit upon that would
not have occurred to a single individual.

       *       *       *       *       *

This being premised, it will suffice to faintly sketch out some sort
of basis for eugenics, it being now an understanding that we are
provisionally agreed, for the sake of argument, that the improvement
of race is an object of first-class importance, and that the popular
feeling has been educated to regard it in that light.

The final object would be to devise means for favouring individuals
who bore the signs of membership of a superior race, the proximate
aim would be to ascertain what those signs were, and these we will
consider first.

The indications of superior breed are partly personal, partly
ancestral. We need not trouble ourselves about the personal part,
because full weight is already given to it in the competitive careers;
energy, brain, morale, and health being recognised factors of success,
while there can hardly be a better evidence of a person being
adapted to his circumstances than that afforded by success. It is
the ancestral part that is neglected, and which we have yet to
recognise at its just value. A question that now continually arises
is this: a youth is a candidate for permanent employment, his
present personal qualifications are known, but how will he turn out
in later years? The objections to competitive examinations are
notorious, in that they give undue prominence to youths whose
receptive faculties are quick, and whose intellects are precocious.
They give no indication of the directions in which the health,
character, and intellect of the youth will change through the
development, in their due course, of ancestral tendencies that are
latent in youth, but will manifest themselves in after life.
Examinations deal with the present, not with the future, although it
is in the future of the youth that we are especially interested.
Much of the needed guidance may be derived from his family history.
I cannot doubt, if two youths were of equal personal merit, of whom
one belonged to a thriving and long-lived family, and the other to a
decaying and short-lived family, that there could be any hesitation
in saying that the chances were greater of the first-mentioned youth
becoming the more valuable public servant of the two.

A thriving family may be sufficiently defined or inferred by the
successive occupations of its several male members in the previous
generation, and of the two grandfathers. These are patent facts
attainable by almost every youth, which admit of being verified in
his neighbourhood and attested in a satisfactory manner.

A healthy and long-lived family may be defined by the patent facts
of ages at death, and number and ages of living relatives, within
the degrees mentioned above, all of which can be verified and
attested. A knowledge of the existence of longevity in the family
would testify to the stamina of the candidate, and be an important
addition to the knowledge of his present health in forecasting the
probability of his performing a large measure of experienced work.

Owing to absence of data and the want of inquiry of the family
antecedents of those who fail and of those who succeed in life, we
are much more ignorant than we ought to be of their relative
importance. In connection with this, I may mention some curious
results published by Mr. F.M. Holland[18] of Boston, U.S., as to the
antecedent family history of persons who were reputed to be more
moral than the average, and of those who were the reverse. He has

been good enough to reply to questions that I sent to him concerning
his criterion of morality, and other points connected with the
statistics, in a way that seems satisfactory, and he has very
obligingly furnished me with additional MS. materials. One of his
conclusions was that morality is more often found among members of
large families than among those of small ones. It is reasonable to
expect this would be the case owing to the internal discipline among
members of large families, and to the wholesome sustaining and
restraining effects of family pride and family criticism. Members of
small families are apt to be selfish, and when the smallness of the
family is due to the deaths of many of its members at early ages, it
is some evidence either of weakness of the family constitution, or of
deficiency of common sense or of affection on the part of the
parents in not taking better care of them. Mr. Holland quotes in his
letter to me a piece of advice by Franklin to a young man in search
of a wife, "to take one out of a bunch of sisters," and a popular
saying that kittens brought up with others make the best pets,
because they have learned to play without scratching. Sir William
Gull[19] has remarked that those candidates for the Indian Civil
Service who are members of large families are on the whole the
strongest.

[Footnote 18: _Index Newspaper_, Boston, U.S. July 27, 1882.]

Far be it from me to say that any scheme of marks for family merit
would not require a great deal of preparatory consideration. Careful
statistical inquiries have yet to be made into the family
antecedents of public servants of mature age in connection with
their place in examination lists at the earlier age when they first
gained their appointments. This would be necessary in order to learn
the amount of marks that should be assigned to various degrees of
family merit. I foresee no peculiar difficulty in conducting such an
inquiry; indeed, now that competitive examinations have been in
general use for many years, the time seems ripe for it, but of
course its conduct would require much confidential inquiry and a
great deal of trouble in verifying returns. Still, it admits of
being done, and if the results, derived from different sources,
should confirm one another, they could be depended on.

[Footnote 19: _Blue Book C_--1446, 1876. On the Selection and
Training of Candidates for the Indian Civil Service.]

Let us now suppose that a way was seen for carrying some such idea
as this into practice, and that family merit, however defined, was
allowed to count, for however little, in competitive examinations.
The effect would be very great: it would show that ancestral
qualities are of present current value; it would give an impetus to
collecting family histories; it would open the eyes of every family
and or society at large to the importance of marriage alliance with
a good stock; it would introduce the subject of race into a
permanent topic of consideration, which (on the supposition of its
_bona fide_ importance that has been assumed for the sake of
argument) experience would show to be amply justified. Any act that
first gives a guinea stamp to the sterling guinea's worth of natural
nobility might set a great social avalanche in motion.




ENDOWMENTS.

Endowments and bequests have been freely and largely made for
various social purposes, and as a matter of history they have
frequently been made to portion girls in marriage. It so happens
that the very day that I am writing this, I notice an account in the
foreign newspapers (September 19, 1882) of an Italian who has
bequeathed a sum to the corporation of London to found small
portions for three poor girls to be selected by lot. And again, a
few weeks ago I read also in the French papers of a trial, in
reference to the money adjudged to the "Rosiere" of a certain village.
Many cases in which individuals and states have portioned girls may
be found in Malthus. It is therefore far from improbable that if the
merits of good race became widely recognised and its indications
were rendered more surely intelligible than they now are, that local
endowments, and perhaps adoptions, might be made in favour of those
of both sexes who showed evidences of high race and of belonging to
prolific and thriving families. One cannot forecast their form,
though we may reckon with some assurance that in one way or another
they would be made, and that the better races would be given a
better chance of marrying early.

A curious relic of the custom which was universal three or four
centuries ago, of entrusting education to celibate priests, forbade
Fellows of Colleges to marry, under the penalty of losing their
fellowships. It is as though the winning horses at races were
rendered ineligible to become sires, which I need hardly say is the
exact reverse of the practice. Races were established and endowed by
"Queen's plates" and otherwise at vast expense, for the purpose of
discovering the swiftest horses, who are thenceforward exempted from
labour and reserved for the sole purpose of propagating their species.
The horses who do not win races, or who are not otherwise specially
selected for their natural gifts, are prevented from becoming sires.
Similarly, the mares who win races as fillies, are not allowed to
waste their strength in being ridden or driven, but are tended under
sanatory conditions for the sole purpose of bearing offspring. It is
better economy, in the long-run, to use the best mares as breeders
than as workers, the loss through their withdrawal from active
service being more than recouped in the next generation through what
is gained by their progeny.

The college statutes to which I referred were very recently relaxed
at Oxford, and have been just reformed at Cambridge. I am told that
numerous marriages have ensued in consequence, or are ensuing. In
_Hereditary Genius_ I showed that scholastic success runs strongly
in families; therefore, in all seriousness, I have no doubt, that
the number of Englishmen naturally endowed with high scholastic
faculties, will be sensibly increased in future generations by the
repeal of these ancient statutes.

The English race has yet to be explored and their now unknown wealth
of hereditary gifts recorded, that those who possess such a
patrimony should know of it. The natural impulses of mankind would
then be sufficient to ensure that such wealth should no more
continue to be neglected than the existence of any other possession
suddenly made known to a man. Aristocracies seldom make alliances
out of their order, except to gain wealth. Is it less to be expected
that those who become aware that they are endowed with the power of
transmitting valuable hereditary gifts should abstain from
squandering their future children's patrimony by marrying persons of
lower natural stamp? The social consideration that would attach
itself to high races would, it may be hoped, partly neutralise a
social cause that is now very adverse to the early marriages of the
most gifted, namely, the cost of living in cultured and refined
society. A young man with a career before him commonly feels it
would be an act of folly to hamper himself by too early a marriage.
The doors of society that are freely open to a bachelor are closed
to a married couple with small means, unless they bear patent
recommendations such as the public recognition of a natural nobility
would give. The attitude of mind that I should expect to predominate
among those who had undeniable claims to rank as members of an
exceptionally gifted race, would be akin to that of the modern
possessors of ancestral property or hereditary rank. Such persons
feel it a point of honour not to alienate the old place or make
misalliances, and they are respected for their honest family pride.
So a man of good race would shrink from spoiling it by a lower
marriage, and every one would sympathise with his sentiments.




CONCLUSION.

It remains to sketch in outline the principal conclusions to which
we seem to be driven by the results of the various inquiries
contained in this volume, and by what we know on allied topics from
the works of others.

We cannot but recognise the vast variety of natural faculty, useful
and harmful, in members of the same race, and much more in the human
family at large, all of which tend to be transmitted by inheritance.
Neither can we fail to observe that the faculties of men generally,
are unequal to the requirements of a high and growing civilisation.
This is principally owing to their entire ancestry having lived up
to recent times under very uncivilised conditions, and to the
somewhat capricious distribution in late times of inherited wealth,
which affords various degrees of immunity from the usual selective
agencies.

In solution of the question whether a continual improvement in
education might not compensate for a stationary or even retrograde
condition of natural gifts, I made inquiry into the life history of
twins, which resulted in proving the vastly preponderating effects
of nature over nurture.

The fact that the very foundation and outcome of the human mind is
dependent on race, and that the qualities of races vary, and
therefore that humanity taken as a whole is not fixed but variable,
compels us to reconsider what may be the true place and function of
man in the order of the world. I have examined this question freely
from many points of view, because whatever may be the vehemence with
which particular opinions are insisted upon, its solution is
unquestionably doubtful. There is a wide and growing conviction
among truth-seeking, earnest, humble-minded, and thoughtful men,
both in this country and abroad, that our cosmic relations are by no
means so clear and simple as they are popularly supposed to be,
while the worthy and intelligent teachers of various creeds, who
have strong persuasions on the character of those relations, do not
concur in their several views.

The results of the inquiries I have made into certain alleged forms
of our relations with the unseen world do not, so far as they go,
confirm the common doctrines. One, for example, on the objective
efficacy of prayer[20] was decidedly negative. It showed that while
contradicting the commonly expressed doctrine, it concurred with the
almost universal practical opinion of the present day. Another
inquiry into visions showed that, however ill explained they may
still be, they belong for the most part, if not altogether, to an
order of phenomena which no one dreams in other cases of calling
supernatural. Many investigations concur in showing the vast
multiplicity of mental operations that are in simultaneous action,
of which only a minute part falls within the ken of consciousness,
and suggest that much of what passes for supernatural is due to one
portion of our mind being contemplated by another portion of it, as
if it had been that of another person. The term "individuality" is
in fact a most misleading word.

[Footnote 20: Not reprinted in this edition.]

I do not for a moment wish to imply that the few inquiries published
in this volume exhaust the list of those that might be made, for I
distinctly hold the contrary, but I refer to them in corroboration
of the previous assertion that our relations with the unseen world
are different to those we are commonly taught to believe.

In our doubt as to the character of our mysterious relations with
the unseen ocean of actual and potential life by which we are
surrounded, the generally accepted fact of the solidarity of the
universe--that is, of the intimate connections between distant parts
that bind it together as a whole--justifies us, I think, in looking
upon ourselves as members of a vast system which in one of its
aspects resembles a cosmic republic.

On the one hand, we know that evolution has proceeded during an
enormous time on this earth, under, so far as we can gather, a
system of rigorous causation, with no economy of time or of
instruments, and with no show of special ruth for those who may in
pure ignorance have violated the conditions of life.

On the other hand, while recognising the awful mystery of conscious
existence and the inscrutable background of evolution, we find that
as the foremost outcome of many and long birth-throes, intelligent
and kindly man finds himself in being. He knows how petty he is, but
he also perceives that he stands here on this particular earth, at
this particular time, as the heir of untold ages and in the van of
circumstance. He ought therefore, I think, to be less diffident than
he is usually instructed to be, and to rise to the conception that
he has a considerable function to perform in the order of events,
and that his exertions are needed. It seems to me that he should
look upon himself more as a freeman, with power of shaping the
course of future humanity, and that he should look upon himself less
as the subject of a despotic government, in which case it would be
his chief merit to depend wholly upon what had been regulated for him,
and to render abject obedience.

The question then arises as to the way in which man can assist in
the order of events. I reply, by furthering the course of evolution.
He may use his intelligence to discover and expedite the changes
that are necessary to adapt circumstance to race and race to
circumstance, and his kindly sympathy will urge him to effect them
mercifully.

When we begin to inquire, with some misgiving perhaps, as to the
evidence that man has present power to influence the quality of
future humanity, we soon discover that his past influence in that
direction has been very large indeed. It has been exerted hitherto
for other ends than that which is now contemplated, such as for
conquest or emigration, also through social conditions whose effects
upon race were imperfectly foreseen. There can be no doubt that the
hitherto unused means of his influence are also numerous and great.
I have not cared to go much into detail concerning these, but
restricted myself to a few broad considerations, as by showing how
largely the balance of population becomes affected by the earlier
marriages of some of its classes, and by pointing out the great
influence that endowments have had in checking the marriage of monks
and scholars, and therefore the yet larger influence they might be
expected to have if they were directed not to thwart but to
harmonise with natural inclination, by promoting early marriages in
the classes to be favoured. I also showed that a powerful influence
might flow from a public recognition in early life of the true value
of the probability of future performance, as based on the past
performance of the ancestors of the child. It is an element of
forecast, in addition to that of present personal merit, which has
yet to be appraised and recognised. Its recognition would attract
assistance in various ways, impossible now to specify, to the young
families of those who were most likely to stock the world with
healthy, moral, intelligent, and fair-natured citizens. The stream
of charity is not unlimited, and it is requisite for the speedier
evolution of a more perfect humanity that it should be so
distributed as to favour the best-adapted races. I have not spoken
of the repression of the rest, believing that it would ensue
indirectly as a matter of course; but I may add that few would
deserve better of their country than those who determine to live
celibate lives, through a reasonable conviction that their issue
would probably be less fitted than the generality to play their part
as citizens.

It would be easy to add to the number of possible agencies by which
the evolution of a higher humanity might be furthered, but it is
premature to do so until the importance of attending to the
improvement of our race shall have been so well established in the
popular mind that a discussion of them would be likely to receive
serious consideration.

It is hardly necessary to insist on the certainty that our present
imperfect knowledge of the limitations and conditions of hereditary
transmission will be steadily added to; but I would call attention
again to the serious want of adequate materials for study in the
form of life-histories. It is fortunately the case that many of the
rising medical practitioners of the foremost rank are become strongly
impressed with the necessity of possessing them, not only for the
better knowledge of the theory of disease, but for the personal
advantage of their patients, whom they now have to treat less
appropriately than they otherwise would, through ignorance of their
hereditary tendencies and of their illnesses in past years, the
medical details of which are rarely remembered by the patient, even
if he ever knew them. With the help of so powerful a personal motive
for keeping life-histories, and of so influential a body as the
medical profession to advocate its being done,[21] and to show how
to do it, there is considerable hope that the want of materials to
which I have alluded will gradually be supplied.

[Footnote 21: See an address on the Collective Investigation of
Disease, by Sir William Gull, _British Medical Journal_, January 27,
1883, p. 143; also the following address by Sir James Paget, p. 144.]

To sum up in a few words. The chief result of these Inquiries has
been to elicit the religious significance of the doctrine of
evolution. It suggests an alteration in our mental attitude, and
imposes a new moral duty. The new mental attitude is one of a
greater sense of moral freedom, responsibility, and opportunity; the
new duty which is supposed to be exercised concurrently with, and
not in opposition to the old ones upon which the social fabric
depends, is an endeavour to further evolution, especially that of
the human race.




APPENDIX


A.--COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE.

The object and methods of Composite Portraiture will be best
explained by the following extracts from memoirs describing its
successive stages, published in 1878, 1879, and 1881 respectively:--

I. COMPOSITE PORTRAITS, MADE BY COMBINING
   THOSE OF MANY DIFFERENT PERSONS INTO A SINGLE RESULTANT FIGURE.

  [_Extract from Memoir read before the Anthropological Institute,
  in 1878_.]

I submit to the Anthropological Institute my first results in
carrying out a process that I suggested last August [1877] in my
presidential address to the Anthropological Subsection of the
British Association at Plymouth, in the following words:--

"Having obtained drawings or photographs of several persons alike in
most respects, but differing in minor details, what sure method is
there of extracting the typical characteristics from them? I may
mention a plan which had occurred both to Mr. Herbert Spencer and
myself, the principle of which is to superimpose optically the
various drawings, and to accept the aggregate result. Mr. Spencer
suggested to me in conversation that the drawings reduced to the
same scale might be traced on separate pieces of transparent paper
and secured one upon another, and then held between the eye and the
light. I have attempted this with some success. My own idea was to
throw faint images of the several portraits, in succession, upon the
same sensitised photographic plate. I may add that it is perfectly
easy to superimpose optically two portraits by means of a stereoscope,
and that a person who is used to handle instruments will find a
common double eyeglass fitted with stereoscopic lenses to be almost
as effectual and far handier than the boxes sold in shops."

Mr. Spencer, as he informed me, had actually devised an instrument,
many years ago, for tracing mechanically, longitudinal, transverse,
and horizontal sections of heads on transparent paper, intending to
superimpose them, and to obtain an average result by transmitted
light.

Since my address was published, I have caused trials to be made, and
have found, as a matter of fact, that the photographic process of
which I there spoke enables us to obtain with mechanical precision a
generalised picture; one that represents no man in particular, but
portrays an imaginary figure possessing the average features of any
given group of men. These ideal faces have a surprising air of
reality. Nobody who glanced at one of them for the first time would
doubt its being the likeness of a living person, yet, as I have said,
it is no such thing; it is the portrait of a type and not of an
individual.

I begin by collecting photographs of the persons with whom I propose
to deal. They must be similar in attitude and size, but no exactness
is necessary in either of these respects. Then, by a simple
contrivance, I make two pinholes in each of them, to enable me to
hang them up one in front of the other, like a pack of cards, upon
the same pair of pins, in such a way that the eyes of all the
portraits shall be as nearly as possible superimposed; in which case
the remainder of the features will also be superimposed nearly enough.
These pinholes correspond to what are technically known to printers
as "register marks." They are easily made: A slip of brass or card
has an aperture cut out of its middle, and threads are stretched
from opposite sides, making a cross.[22] Two small holes are drilled
in the plate, one on either side of the aperture. The slip of brass
is laid on the portrait with the aperture over its face. It is turned
about until one of the cross threads cuts the pupils of both the eyes,
and it is further adjusted until the other thread divides the
interval between the pupils in two equal parts. Then it is held
firmly, and a prick is made through each of the holes.

[Footnote 22: I am indebted for the woodcuts to the Editor of
_Nature_, in which journal this memoir first appeared.]

[Illustration: ]

The portraits being thus arranged, a photographic camera is directed
upon them. Suppose there are eight portraits in the pack, and
that under existing circumstances it would require an exposure of
eighty seconds to give an exact photographic copy of any one
of them. The general principle of proceeding is this, subject in
practice to some variations of detail, depending on the different
brightness of the several portraits. We throw the image of each of
the eight portraits in turn upon the same part of the sensitised
plate for ten seconds. Thus, portrait No. 1 is in the front of the
pack; we take the cap off the object glass of the camera for ten
seconds, and afterwards replace it. We then remove No. 1 from the
pins, and No. 2 appears in the front; we take off the cap a second
time for ten seconds, and again replace it. Next we remove No. 2,
and No. 3 appears in the front, which we treat as its predecessors,
and so we go on to the last of the pack. The sensitised plate will
now have had its total exposure of eighty seconds; it is then
developed, and the print taken from it is the generalised picture of
which I speak. It is a composite of eight component portraits. Those
of its outlines are sharpest and darkest that are common to the
largest number of the components; the purely individual
peculiarities leave little or no visible trace. The latter being
necessarily disposed equally on both sides of the average, the
outline of the composite is the average of all the components. It is
a band and not a fine line, because the outlines of the components
are seldom exactly superimposed. The band will be darkest in its
middle whenever the component portraits have the same general type
of features, and its breadth, or amount of blur, will measure the
tendency of the components to deviate from the common type. This is
so for the very same reason that the shot-marks on a target are more
thickly disposed near the bull's-eye than away from it, and in a
greater degree as the marksmen are more skilful. All that has been
said of the outlines is equally true as regards the shadows; the
result being that the composite represents an averaged figure, whose
lineaments have been softly drawn. The eyes come out with
appropriate distinctness, owing to the mechanical conditions under
which the components are hung.

[Illustration: ]

A composite portrait represents the picture that would rise before
the mind's eye of a man who had the gift of pictorial imagination in
an exalted degree. But the imaginative power even of the highest
artists is far from precise, and is so apt to be biassed by special
cases that may have struck their fancies, that no two artists agree
in any of their typical forms. The merit of the photographic
composite is its mechanical precision, being subject to no errors
beyond those incidental to all photographic productions.

I submit several composites made for me by Mr. H. Reynolds. The
first set of portraits are those of criminals convicted of murder,
manslaughter, or robbery accompanied with violence. It will be
observed that the features of the composites are much better looking
than those of the components. The special villainous irregularities
in the latter have disappeared, and the common humanity that
underlies them has prevailed. They represent, not the criminal, but
the man who is liable to fall into crime. All composites are better
looking than their components, because the averaged portrait of many
persons is free from the irregularities that variously blemish the
looks of each of them.

I selected these for my first trials because I happened to possess a
large collection of photographs of criminals, through the kindness
of Sir Edmund Du Cane, the Director-General of Prisons, for the
purpose of investigating criminal types. They were peculiarly
adapted to my present purpose, being all made of about the same size,
and taken in much the same attitudes. It was while endeavouring to
elicit the principal criminal types by methods of optical
superimposition of the portraits, such as I had frequently employed
with maps and meteorological traces,[23] that the idea of composite
figures first occurred to me.

[Footnote 23: _Conference at the Loan Exhibition of Scientific
Instruments_, 1878. Chapman and Hall. Physical Geography Section, p.
312, _On Means of Combining Various Data in Maps and Diagrams_, by
Francis Galton, F.R.S.]

The other set of composites are made from pairs of components. They
are selected to show the extraordinary facility of combining almost
any two faces whose proportions are in any way similar.

It will, I am sure, surprise most persons to see how well defined
these composites are. When we deal with faces of the same type, the
points of similarity far outnumber those of dissimilarity, and there
is a much greater resemblance between faces generally than we who
turn our attention to individual differences are apt to appreciate.
A traveller on his first arrival among people of a race very
different to his own thinks them closely alike, and a Hindu has much
difficulty in distinguishing one Englishman from another.

The fairness with which photographic composites represent their
components is shown by six of the specimens. I wished to learn
whether the order in which the components were photographed made any
material difference in the result, so I had three of the portraits
arranged successively in each of their six possible combinations. It
will be observed that four at least of the six composites are
closely alike. I should say that in each of this set (which was made
by the wet process) the last of the three components was always
allowed a longer exposure than the second, and the second than the
first, but it is found better to allow an equal time to all of them.

[Illustration: The accompanying woodcut is as fair a representation
of one of the composites as is practicable in ordinary printing. It
was photographically transferred to the wood, and the engraver has
used his best endeavour to translate the shades into line engraving.
This composite is made out of only three components, and its
threefold origin is to be traced in the ears, and in the buttons to
the vest. To the best of my judgment, the original photograph is a
very exact average of its components; not one feature in it appears
identical with that of any one of them, but it contains a
resemblance to all, and is not more like to one of them than to
another. However, the judgment of the wood engraver is different.
His rendering of the composite has made it exactly like one of its
components, which it must be borne in mind he had never seen. It is
just as though an artist drawing a child had produced a portrait
closely resembling its deceased father, having overlooked an equally
strong likeness to its deceased mother, which was apparent to its
relatives. This is to me a most striking proof that the composite is
a true combination.]

The stereoscope, as I stated last August in my address at Plymouth,
affords a very easy method of optically superimposing two portraits,
and I have much pleasure in quoting the following letter, pointing
out this fact as well as some other conclusions to which I also had
arrived. The letter was kindly forwarded to me by Mr. Darwin; it is
dated last November, and was written to him by Mr. A.L. Austin, from
New Zealand, thus affording another of the many curious instances of
two persons being independently engaged in the same novel inquiry at
nearly the same time, and coming to similar results:--


  INVERCARGILL, NEW ZEALAND,
   _November 6th_, 1877.

  To CHARLES DARWIN, Esq.


SIR,--Although a perfect stranger to you, and living on the reverse
side of the globe, I have taken the liberty of writing to you on a
small discovery I have made in binocular vision in the stereoscope.
I find by taking two ordinary carre-de-visite photos of two
different persons' faces, the portraits being about the same sizes,
and looking about the same direction, and placing them in a
stereoscope, the faces blend into one in a most remarkable manner,
producing in the case of some ladies' portraits, in every instance,
a _decided improvement_ in beauty. The pictures were not taken in a
binocular camera, and therefore do not stand out well, but by moving
one or both until the eyes coincide in the stereoscope the pictures
blend perfectly. If taken in a binocular camera for the purpose,
each person being taken on one half of the negative, I am sure the
results would be still more striking. Perhaps something might be
made of this in regard to the expression of emotions in man and the
lower animals, &c. I have not time or opportunities to make
experiments, but it seems to me something might be made of this by
photographing the faces of different animals, different races of
mankind, &c. I think a stereoscopic view of one of the ape tribe and
some low-caste human face would make a very curious mixture; also in
the matter of crossing of animals and the resulting offspring. It
seems to me something also might result in photos of husband and
wife and children, &c. In any case, the results are curious, if it
leads to nothing else. Should this come to anything you will no
doubt acknowledge myself as suggesting the experiment, and perhaps
send me some of the results. If not likely to come to anything, a
reply would much oblige me.

 Yours very truly,
   A.L. AUSTIN, C.E., F.R.A.S.


Dr. Carpenter informs me that the late Mr. Appold, the mechanician,
used to combine two portraits of himself under the stereoscope. The
one had been taken with an assumed stern expression, the other with
a smile, and this combination produced a curious and effective
blending of the two.

Convenient as the stereoscope is, owing to its accessibility, for
determining whether any two portraits are suitable in size and
attitude to form a good composite, it is nevertheless a makeshift
and imperfect way of attaining the required result. It cannot of
itself combine two images; it can only place them so that the office
of attempting to combine them may be undertaken by the brain. Now
the two separate impressions received by the brain through the
stereoscope do not seem to me to be relatively constant in their
vividness, but sometimes the image seen by the left eye prevails
over that seen by the right, and _vice versa_. All the other
instruments I am about to describe accomplish that which the
stereoscope fails to do; they create true optical combinations. As
regards other points in Mr. Austin's letter, I cannot think that the
use of a binocular camera for taking the two portraits intended to
be combined into one by the stereoscope would be of importance. All
that is wanted is that the portraits should be nearly of the same
size. In every other respect I cordially agree with Mr. Austin.

The best instrument I have as yet contrived and used for optical
superimposition is a "double-image prism" of Iceland spar (see Fig.,
p. 228), formerly procured for me by the late Mr. Tisley, optician,
Brompton Road. They have a clear aperture of a square, half an inch
in the side, and when held at right angles to the line of sight will
separate the ordinary and extraordinary images to the amount of two
inches, when the object viewed is held at seventeen inches from the
eye. This is quite sufficient for working with carte-de-visite
portraits. One image is quite achromatic, the other shows a little
colour. The divergence may be varied and adjusted by inclining the
prism to the line of sight. By its means the ordinary image of one
component is thrown upon the extraordinary image of the other, and
the composite may be viewed by the naked eye, or through a lens of
long focus, or through an opera-glass (a telescope is not so good)
fitted with a sufficiently long draw-tube to see an object at that
short distance with distinctness. Portraits of somewhat different
sizes may be combined by placing the larger one farther from the eye,
and a long face may be fitted to a short one by inclining and
foreshortening the former. The slight fault of focus thereby
occasioned produces little or no sensible ill effect on the
appearance of the composite.

The front, or the profile, faces of two living persons sitting side
by side or one behind the other, can be easily superimposed by a
double-image prism. Two such prisms set one behind the other can be
made to give four images of equal brightness, occupying the four
corners of a rhombus whose acute angles are 45 deg. Three prisms will
give eight images, but this is practically not a good combination;
the images fail in distinctness, and are too near together for use.
Again, each lens of a stereoscope of long focus can have one or a
pair of these prisms attached to it, and four or eight images may be
thus combined.

[Illustration: Fig. 1 shows the simple apparatus which carries the
prism and on which the photograph is mounted. The former is set in a
round box which can be rotated in the ring at the end of the arm and
can be clamped when adjusted. The arm can be rotated and can also be
pulled out or in if desired, and clamped. The floor of the
instrument is overlaid with cork covered with black cloth, on which
the components can easily be fixed by drawing-pins. When using it,
one portrait is pinned down and the other is moved near to it,
overlapping its margin if necessary, until the eye looking through
the prism sees the required combination; then the second portrait is
pinned down also. It may now receive its register-marks from needles
fixed in a hinged arm, and this is a more generally applicable
method than the plan with cross threads, already described, as any
desired feature--the nose, the ear, or the hand, may thus be
selected for composite purposes. Let A, B, C, ... Y, Z, be the
components. A is pinned down, and B, C, ... Y, Z, are successfully
combined with A, and registered. Then before removing Z, take away A
and substitute any other of the already registered portraits, say B,
by combining it with Z; lastly, remove Z and substitute A by
combining it with B, and register it. Fig. 2 shows one of three
similarly jointed arms, which clamp on to the vertical covered with
cork and cloth, and the other carries Fig. 3, which is a frame
having lenses of different powers set into it, and on which, or on
the third frame, a small mirror inclined at 45 deg. may be laid. When a
portrait requires foreshortening it can be pinned on one of these
frames and be inclined to the line of sight; when it is smaller than
its fellow it can be brought nearer to the eye and an appropriate
lens interposed; when a right-sided profile has to be combined with a
left-handed one, it must be pinned on one of the frames and viewed by
reflection from the mirror in the other. The apparatus I have drawn
is roughly made, and being chiefly of wood is rather clumsy, but it
acts well.]

Another instrument I have made consists of a piece of glass inclined
at a very acute angle to the line of sight, and of a mirror beyond it,
also inclined, but in the opposite direction to the line of sight.
Two rays of light will therefore reach the eye from each point of
the glass; the one has been reflected from its surface, and the
other has been first reflected from the mirror, and then transmitted
through the glass. The glass used should be extremely thin, to avoid
the blur due to double reflections; it may be a selected piece from
those made to cover microscopic specimens. The principle of the
instrument may be yet further developed by interposing additional
pieces of glass, successively less inclined to the line of sight,
and each reflecting a different portrait.

I have tried many other plans; indeed the possible methods of
optically superimposing two or more images are very numerous. Thus I
have used a sextant (with its telescope attached); also strips of
mirrors placed at different angles, their several reflections being
simultaneously viewed through a telescope. I have also used a
divided lens, like two stereoscopic lenses brought close together,
in front of the object glass of a telescope.


II. GENERIC IMAGES.

  [_Extract from Proceedings Royal Institution, 25th April 1879_]

Our general impressions are founded upon blended memories, and these
latter will be the chief topic of the present discourse. An analogy
will be pointed out between these and the blended portraits first
described by myself a year ago under the name of "Composite Portraits,"
and specimens of the latter will be exhibited.

The physiological basis of memory is simple enough in its broad
outlines. Whenever any group of brain elements has been excited by a
sense impression, it becomes, so to speak, tender, and liable to be
easily thrown again into a similar state of excitement. If the new
cause of excitement differs from the original one, a memory is the
result. Whenever a single cause throws different groups of brain
elements simultaneously into excitement, the result must be a
blended memory.

We are familiar with the fact that faint memories are very apt to
become confused. Thus some picture of mountain and lake in a country
which we have never visited, often recalls a vague sense of identity
with much we have seen elsewhere. Our recollections cannot be
disentangled, though general resemblances are recognised. It is also
a fact that the memories of persons who have great powers of
visualising, that is, of seeing well-defined images in the mind's eye,
are no less capable of being blended together. Artists are, as a
class, possessed of the visualising power in a high degree, and they
are at the same time pre-eminently distinguished by their gifts of
generalisation. They are of all men the most capable of producing
forms that are not copies of any individual, but represent the
characteristic features of classes.

There is then, no doubt, from whatever side the subject of memory is
approached, whether from the material or from the mental, and, in
the latter case, whether we examine the experiences of those in whom
the visualising faculty is faint or in whom it is strong, that the
brain has the capacity of blending memories together. Neither can
there be any doubt that general impressions are faint and perhaps
faulty editions of blended memories. They are subject to errors of
their own, and they inherit all those to which the memories are
themselves liable.

Specimens of blended portraits will now be exhibited; these might,
with more propriety, be named, according to the happy phrase of
Professor Huxley, "generic" portraits. The word generic presupposes
a genus, that is to say, a collection of individuals who have much
in common, and among whom medium characteristics are very much more
frequent than extreme ones. The same idea is sometimes expressed by
the word "typical," which was much used by Quetelet, who was the
first to give it a rigorous interpretation, and whose idea of a type
lies at the basis of his statistical views. No statistician dreams
of combining objects into the same generic group that do not cluster
towards a common centre; no more should we attempt to compose
generic portraits out of heterogeneous elements, for if we do so the
result is monstrous and meaningless.

It might be expected that when many different portraits are fused
into a single one, the result would be a mere smudge. Such, however,
is by no means the case, under the conditions just laid down, of a
great prevalence of the mediocre characteristics over the extreme
ones. There are then so many traits in common, to combine and to
reinforce one another, that they prevail to the exclusion of the rest.
All that is common remains, all that is individual tends to disappear.

The first of the composites exhibited on this occasion is made by
conveying the images of three separate portraits by means of three
separate magic-lanterns upon the same screen. The stands on which
the lanterns are mounted have been arranged to allow of nice
adjustment. The composite about to be shown is one that strains the
powers of the process somewhat too severely, the portraits combined
being those of two brothers and their sister, who have not even been
photographed in precisely the same attitudes. Nevertheless, the
result is seen to be the production of a face, neither male nor
female, but more regular and handsome than any of the component
portraits, and in which the common family traits are clearly marked.
Ghosts of portions of male and female attire, due to the
peculiarities of the separate portraits, are seen about and around
the composite, but they are not sufficiently vivid to distract the
attention. If the number of combined portraits had been large, these
ghostly accessories would have become too faint to be visible.

The next step is to compare this portrait of two brothers and their
sister which has been composed by optical means before the eyes of
the audience, and concerning the truthfulness of which there can be
no doubt, with a photographic composite of the same group. The
latter is now placed in a fourth magic-lantern with a brighter light
behind it, and its image is thrown on the screen by the side of the
composite produced by direct optical superposition. It will be
observed that the two processes lead to almost exactly the same
result, and therefore the fairness of the photographic process may
be taken for granted. However, two other comparisons will be made
for the sake of verification, namely, between the optical and
photographic composites of two children, and again between those of
two Roman contadini.

The composite portraits that will next be exhibited are made by the
photographic process, and it will now be understood that they are
truly composite, notwithstanding their definition and apparent
individuality. Attention is, however, first directed to a convenient
instrument not more than 18 inches in length, which is, in fact, a
photographic camera with six converging lenses and an attached screen,
on which six pictures can be adjusted and brilliantly illuminated by
artificial light. The effect of their optical combination can thus
be easily studied; any errors of adjustment can be rectified, and
the composite may be photographed at once.

It must not be supposed that any one of the components fails to
leave its due trace in the photographic composite, much less in the
optical one. In order to allay misgivings on the subject, a small
apparatus is laid on the table together with some of the results
obtained by it. It is a cardboard frame, with a spring shutter
closing an aperture of the size of a wafer, that springs open on the
pressure of a finger, and shuts again as suddenly when the pressure
is withdrawn. A chronograph is held in the other hand, whose index
begins to travel the moment the finger presses a spring, and stops
instantly on lifting the finger. The two instruments are worked
simultaneously; the chronograph checking the time allowed for each
exposure and summing all the times. It appears from several trials
that the effect of 1000 brief exposures is practically identical
with that of a single exposure of 1000 times the duration of any one
of them. Therefore each of a thousand components leaves its due
photographic trace on the composite, though it is far too faint to
be visible unless reinforced by many similar traces.

The composites now to be exhibited are made from coins or medals,
and in most instances the aim has been to obtain the best likeness
attainable of historical personages, by combining various portraits
of them taken at different periods of their lives, and so to elicit
the traits that are common to each series. A few of the individual
portraits are placed in the same slide with each composite to give a
better idea of the character of these blended representatives. Those
that are shown are (1) Alexander the Great, from six components;
(2) Antiochus, King of Syria, from six; (3) Demetrius Poliorcetes,
from six; (4) Cleopatra, from five. Here the composite is as usual
better looking than any of the components, none of which, however,
give any indication of her reputed beauty; in fact, her features are
not only plain, but to an ordinary English taste are simply hideous.
(5) Nero, from eleven; (6) A combination of five different Greek
female faces; and (7) A singularly beautiful combination of the
faces of six different Roman ladies, forming a charming ideal profile.

My cordial acknowledgment is due to Mr. R. Stuart Poole, the learned
curator of the coins and gems in the British Museum, for his kind
selection of the most suitable medals, and for procuring casts of
them for me for the present purpose. These casts were, with one
exception, all photographed to a uniform size of four-tenths of an
inch between the pupils of the eyes and the division between the lips,
which experience shows to be the most convenient size on the whole
to work with, regard being paid to many considerations not worth
while to specify in detail. When it was necessary the photograph was
reversed. These photographs were made by Mr. H. Reynolds; I then
adjusted and prepared them for taking the photographic composite.

The next series to be exhibited consists of composites taken from
the portraits of criminals convicted of murder, manslaughter, or
crimes accompanied by violence. There is much interest in the fact
that two types of features are found much more frequently among
these than among the population at large. In one, the features are
broad and massive, like those of Henry VIII., but with a much
smaller brain. The other, of which five composites are exhibited,
each deduced from a number of different individuals, varying four to
nine, is a face that is weak and certainly not a common English face.
Three of these composites, though taken from entirely different sets
of individuals, are as alike as brothers, and it is found on
optically combining any three out of the five composites, that is on
combining almost any considerable number of the individuals, the
result is closely the same. The combination of the three composites
just alluded to will now be effected by means of the three
converging magic-lanterns, and the result may be accepted as generic
in respect of this particular type of criminals.

The process of composite portraiture is one of pictorial statistics.
It is a familiar fact that the average height of even a dozen men of
the same race, taken at hazard, varies so little, that for ordinary
statistical purposes it may be considered constant. The same may be
said of the measurement of every separate feature and limb, and of
every tint, whether of skin, hair, or eyes. Consequently a pictorial
combination of any one of these separate traits would lead to
results no less constant than the statistical averages. In a portrait,
there is another factor to be considered besides the measurement of
the separate traits, namely, their relative position; but this, too,
in a sufficiently large group, would necessarily have a statistical
constancy. As a matter of observation, the resemblance between
persons of the same "genus" (in the sense of "generic," as already
explained) is sufficiently great to admit of making good pictorial
composites out of even small groups, as has been abundantly shown.

Composite pictures, are, however, much more than averages; they are
rather the equivalents of those large statistical tables whose totals,
divided by the number of cases, and entered in the bottom line, are
the averages. They are real generalisations, because they include
the whole of the material under consideration. The blur of their
outlines, which is never great in truly generic composites, except
in unimportant details, measures the tendency of individuals to
deviate from the central type. My argument is, that the generic
images that arise before the mind's eye, and the general impressions
which are faint and faulty editions of them, are the analogues of
these composite pictures which we have the advantage of examining at
leisure, and whose peculiarities and character we can investigate,
and from which we may draw conclusions that shall throw much light
on the nature of certain mental processes which are too mobile and
evanescent to be directly dealt with.


III. COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE.

  [_Read before the Photographic Society, 24th June, 1881_.]

I propose to draw attention to-night to the results of recent
experiments and considerable improvements in a process of which I
published the principles three years ago, and which I have
subsequently exhibited more than once.

I have shown that, if we have the portraits of two or more different
persons, taken in the same aspect and under the same conditions of
light and shade, and that if we put them into different optical
lanterns converging on the same screen and carefully adjust
them--first, so as to bring them to the same scale, and, secondly,
so as to superpose them as accurately as the conditions admit--then
the different faces will blend surprisingly well into a single
countenance. If they are not very dissimilar, the blended result
will always have a curious air of individuality, and will be
unexpectedly well defined; it will exactly resemble none of its
components, but it will have a sort of family likeness to all of them,
and it will be an ideal and an averaged portrait. I have also shown
that the image on the screen might be photographed then and there,
or that the same result may be much more easily obtained by a method
of successive photography, and I have exhibited many specimens made
on this principle. Photo-lithographs of some of these will be found
in the _Proceedings of the Royal Institution_, as illustrations of a
lecture I gave there "On Generic Images" in 1879.

The method I now use is much better than those previously described;
it leads to more accurate results, and is easier to manage. I will
exhibit and explain the apparatus as it stands, and will indicate
some improvements as I go on. The apparatus is here. I use it by
gaslight, and employ rapid dry plates, which, however, under the
conditions of a particularly small aperture and the character of the
light, require sixty seconds of total exposure. The apparatus is 4
feet long and 6-1/2 inches broad; it lies with its side along the
edge of the table at which I sit, and it is sloped towards me, so
that, by bending my neck slightly, I can bring my eye to an eye-hole,
where I watch the effect of the adjustments which my hands are free
to make. The entire management of the whole of these is within an
easy arm's length, and I complete the process without shifting my
seat.

The apparatus consists of three parts, A, B, and C. A is rigidly
fixed; it contains the dark slide and the contrivances by which the
position of the image can be viewed; the eye-hole, _e_, already
mentioned, being part of A. B is a travelling carriage that holds
the lens, and is connected by bellows-work with A. In my apparatus
it is pushed out and in, and clamped where desired, but it ought to
be moved altogether by pinion and rack-work.[24] The lens I use is a
I B Dallmeyer. Its focal length is appropriate to the size of the
instrument, and I find great convenience in a lens of wide aperture
when making the adjustments, as I then require plenty of light; but,
as to the photography, the smaller the aperture the better. The hole
in my stop is only two-tenths of an inch in diameter, and I believe
one-tenth would be more suitable.

[Footnote 24: I have since had a more substantial instrument made
with these and similar improvements.]


[Illustration: DIAGRAM SHOWING THE  ESSENTIAL  PARTS]

_Side View._

_End View._

A The body of the camera, which is fixed.

B Lens on a carriage, which can be
moved to and fro.

C Frame for the transparency, on a carriage
that also supports the lantern;
the whole can be moved to and fro.

_r_ The reflector inside the camera.

_m_ The arm outside the camera attached
to the axis of the reflector; by
moving it, the reflector can be
moved up or down.

_g_ A ground-glass screen on the roof,
which receives the image when the
reflector is turned down, as in the
diagram.

_e_ The eye-hole through which the image
is viewed on _g_; a thin piece of
glass immediately below _e_, reflects
the illuminated fiducial lines in the
transparency at _f_, and gives them
the appearance of lying upon _g_,--the
distances _f e_ and _g e_ being
made equal, the angle _f e g_ being
made a right angle, and the plane
of the thin piece of glass being
made to bisect _f e g_.

_f_ Framework, adjustable, holding the
transparency with the fiducial lines
on it.

_t_ Framework, adjustable, holding the
transparency of the portrait.

C is a travelling carriage that supports the portraits in turn, from
which the composite has to be made. I work directly from the
original negatives with transmitted light; but prints can be used
with light falling on their face. For convenience of description I
will confine myself to the first instance only, and will therefore
speak of C as the carriage that supports the frame that holds the
negative transparencies. C can be pushed along the board and be
clamped anywhere, and it has a rack and pinion adjustment; but it
should have been made movable by rack and pinion along the whole
length of the board. The frame for the transparencies has the same
movements of adjustment as those in the stage of a microscope. It
rotates round a hollow axis, through which a beam of light is thrown,
and independent movements in the plane, at right angles to the axis,
can be given to it in two directions, at right angles to one another,
by turning two separate screws. The beam of light is furnished by
three gas-burners, and it passes through a condenser. The gas is
supplied through a flexible tube that does not interfere with the
movements of C, and it is governed by a stop-cock in front of the
operator.

The apparatus, so far as it has been described with any detail, and
ignoring what was said about an eye-hole, is little else than a
modified copying-camera, by which an image of the transparency could
be thrown on the ordinary focusing-screen, and be altered in scale
and position until it was adjusted to fiducial lines drawn on the
screen. It is conceivable that this should be done, and that the
screen should be replaced by the dark slide, and a brief exposure
given to the plate; then, that a fresh transparency should be
inserted, a fresh focusing adjustment made, and a second exposure
given, and so on. This, I say, is conceivable, but it would be very
inconvenient. The adjusting screws would be out of reach; the head
of the operator would be in an awkward position; and though these
two difficulties might be overcome in some degree, a serious risk of
an occasional shift of the plate during the frequent replacement of
the dark slide would remain. I avoid all this by making my
adjustments while the plate continues in position with its front open.
I do so through the help of a reflector temporarily interposed
between it and the lens. I do not use the ordinary focusing-screen
at all in making my adjustments, but one that is flush, or nearly so,
with the roof of the camera. When the reflector is interposed, the
image is wholly cut off from the sensitised plate, and is thrown
upwards against this focusing-screen, _g_. When the reflector is
withdrawn, the image falls on the plate. It is upon this
focusing-screen in the roof that I see the fiducial lines by which I
make all the adjustments. Nothing can be more convenient than the
position of this focusing-screen for working purposes. I look down
on the image as I do upon a book resting on a sloping desk, and all
the parts of the apparatus are within an easy arm's length.

My reflector in my present instrument is, I am a little ashamed to
confess, nothing better than a piece of looking-glass fixed to an
axle within the camera, near its top left-hand edge. One end of the
axle protrudes, and has a short arm; when I push the arm back, the
mirror is raised; when I push it forward it drops down. I used a
swing-glass because the swing action is very true, and as my
apparatus was merely a provisional working model made of soft wood,
I did not like to use sliding arrangements which might not have
acted truly, or I should certainly have employed a slide with a
rectangular glass prism, on account of the perfect reflection it
affords. And let me say, that a prism of 2 inches square in the side
is quite large enough for adjustment purposes, for it is only the
face of the portrait that is wanted to be seen. I chose my
looking-glass carefully, and selected a piece that was plane and
parallel. It has not too high a polish, and therefore does not give
troublesome double reflections. In fact, it answers very respectably,
especially when we consider that perfection of definition is thrown
away on composites. I thought of a mirror silvered on the front of
the glass, but this would soon tarnish in the gaslight, so I did not
try it. For safety against the admission of light unintentionally, I
have a cap to the focusing-screen in the roof, and a slide in the
fixed body of the instrument immediately behind the reflector and
before the dark slide. Neither of these would be wanted if the
reflector was replaced by a prism, set into one end of a sliding
block that had a large horizontal hole at the other end, and a
sufficient length of solid wood between the two to block out the
passage of light both upwards and downwards whenever the block is
passing through the half-way position.

As regards the fiducial lines, they might be drawn on the glass
screen; but black lines are not, I find, the best. It is far easier
to work with illuminated lines; and it is important to be able to
control their brightness. I produce these lines by means of a
vertical transparency, set in an adjustable frame, connected with A,
and having a gas-light behind it. Below the eye-hole _e_, through
which I view the glass-screen _g_, is a thin piece of glass set at
an angle of 45 deg., which reflects the fiducial lines and gives them
the appearance of lying on the screen, the frame being so adjusted
that the distance from the thin piece of glass to the transparency
and to the glass-screen _g_ is the same. I thus obtain beautiful
fiducial lines, which I can vary from extreme faintness to extreme
brilliancy, by turning the gas lower or higher, according to the
brightness of the image of the portrait, which itself depends on the
density of the transparency that I am engaged upon. This arrangement
seems as good as can be. It affords a gauge of the density of the
negative, and enables me to regulate the burners behind it, until
the image of the portrait on _g_ is adjusted to a standard degree of
brightness.

For convenience in enlarging or reducing, I take care that the
intersection of the vertical fiducial line with that which passes
through the pupils of the eyes shall correspond to the optical axis
of the camera. Then, as I enlarge or reduce, that point in the image
remains fixed. The uppermost horizontal fiducial line continues to
intersect the pupils, and the vertical one continues to divide the
face symmetrically. The mouth has alone to be watched. When the
mouth is adjusted to the lower fiducial line, the scale is exact. It
is a great help having to attend to no more than one varying element.
The only inconvenience is that the image does not lie in the best
position on the plate when the point between the eyes occupies its
centre. This is easily remedied by using a larger back with a
suitable inner frame. I have a more elaborate contrivance in my
apparatus to produce the same result, which I need not stop to
explain.

For success and speed in making composites, the apparatus should be
solidly made, chiefly of metal, and all the adjustments ought to
work smoothly and accurately. Good composites cannot be made without
very careful adjustment in scale and position. An off-hand way of
working produces nothing but failures.

I will first exhibit a very simple but instructive composite effect.
I drew on a square card a circle of about 2-1/2 inches in diameter,
and two cross lines through its centre, cutting one another at right
angles. Round each of the four points, 90 deg. apart, where the cross
cuts the circle, I drew small circles of the size of wafers and
gummed upon each a disc of different tint. Finally I made a single
black dot half-way between two of the arms of the cross. I then made
a composite of the four positions of the card, as it was placed
successively with each of its sides downwards. The result is a
photograph having a sharply-defined cross surrounded by four discs
of precisely uniform tint, and between each pair of arms of the
cross there is a very faint dot. This photograph shows many things.
The fact of its being a composite is shown by the four faint dots.
The equality of the successive periods of exposure is shown by the
equal tint of the four dots. The accuracy of adjustment is shown by
the sharpness of the cross being as great in the composite as in the
original card. We see the smallness of the effect produced by any
trait, such as the dot, when it appears in the same place in only
one of the components: if this effect be so small in a series of
only four components, it would certainly be imperceptible in a much
larger series. Thirdly, the uniformity of resulting tint in the
composite wafer is quite irrespective of the order of exposure. Let
us call the four component wafers A, B, C, D, respectively, and the
four composite wafers 1, 2, 3, 4; then we see, by the diagram, that
the order of exposure has differed in each case, yet the result is
identical. Therefore the order of exposure has no effect on the
result.

|----------+------------------------------------|
|Composite.|Successive places of the Components.|
| 1     2  | A    B | D    A | C    D | B    C  |
| 4     3  | D    C | C    B | B    A | A    D  |
|===============================================|

In 1 it has been A, D, C, B,
 " 2    "        B, A, D, C,
 " 3    "        C, B, A, D,
 " 4    "        D, C, B, A,

I will next show a series consisting of two portraits considerably
unlike to one another, and yet not so very discordant as to refuse
to conform, and of two intermediate composites. In making one of the
composites I gave two-thirds of the total time of exposure to the
first portrait, and one-third to the second portrait. In making the
other composite, I did the converse. It will be seen how good is the
result in both cases, and how the likeness of the longest exposed
portrait always predominates.

The next is a series of four composites. The first consists of 57
hospital patients suffering under one or other of the many forms of
consumption. I may say that, with the aid of Dr. Mahomed, I am
endeavouring to utilise this process to elicit the physiognomy of
disease. The composite I now show is what I call a hotch-pot
composite; its use is to form a standard whence deviations towards
any particular sub-type may be conveniently gauged. It will be
observed that the face is strongly marked, and that it is quite
idealised. I claim for composite portraiture, that it affords a
method of obtaining _pictorial averages_, which effects
simultaneously for every point in a picture what a method of numerical
averages would do for each point in the picture separately. It
gives, in short, the average tint of every unit of area in the
picture, measured from the fiducial lines as co-ordinates. Now every
statistician knows, by experience, that numerical averages usually
begin to agree pretty fairly when we deal with even twenty or thirty
cases. Therefore we should expect to find that any groups of twenty
or thirty men of the same class would yield composites bearing a
considerable likeness to one another. In proof that this is the case,
I exhibit three other composites: the one is made from the first 28
portraits of the 57, the second from the last 27, and the third is
made from 36 portraits taken indiscriminately out of the 57. It will
be observed that all the four composites are closely alike.

I will now show a few typical portraits I selected out of 82 male
portraits of a different series of consumptive male patients; they
were those that had more or less of a particular wan look, that I
wished to elicit. The selected cases were about 18 in number, and
from these I took 12, rejecting about six as having some marked
peculiarity that did not conform well with the remaining 12. The
result is a very striking face, thoroughly ideal and artistic, and
singularly beautiful. It is, indeed, most notable how beautiful all
composites are. Individual peculiarities are all irregularities, and
the composite is always regular.

I show a composite of 15 female faces, also of consumptive patients,
that gives somewhat the same aspect of the disease; also two others
of only 6 in each, that have in consequence less of an ideal look,
but which are still typical. I have here several other typical faces
in my collection of composites; they are all serviceable as
illustrations of this memoir, but, medically speaking, they are only
provisional results.

I am indebted to Lieutenant Leonard Darwin, R.E., for an interesting
series of negatives of officers and privates of the Royal Engineers.
Here is a composite of 12 officers; here is one of 30 privates. I
then thought it better to select from the latter the men that came
from the southern counties, and to again make a further selection of
11 from these, on the principle already explained. Here is the
result. It is very interesting to note the stamp of culture and
refinement on the composite officer, and the honest and vigorous but
more homely features of the privates. The combination of these two,
officers and privates together, gives a very effective physiognomy.

Let it be borne in mind that existing cartes-de-visite are almost
certain to be useless. Among dozens of them it is hard to find three
that fulfil the conditions of similarity of aspect and of shade. The
negatives have to be made on purpose. I use a repeating back and a
quarter plate, and get two good-sized heads on each plate, and of a
scale that never gives less than four-tenths of an inch between the
pupils of the eyes and the mouth. It is only the head that can be
used, as more distant parts, even the ears, become blurred hopelessly.

It will be asked, of what use can all this be to ordinary
photographers, even granting that it may be of scientific value in
ethnological research, in inquiries into the physiognomy of disease,
and for other special purposes? I think it can be turned to most
interesting account in the production of family likenesses. The most
unartistic productions of amateur photography do quite as well for
making composites as those of the best professional workers, because
their blemishes vanish in the blended result. All that amateurs have
to do is to take negatives of the various members of their families
in precisely the same aspect (I recommend either perfect full-face
or perfect profile), and under precisely the same conditions of
light and shade, and to send them to a firm provided with proper
instrumental appliances to make composites from them. The result is
sure to be artistic in expression and flatteringly handsome, and
would be very interesting to the members of the family. Young and old,
and persons of both sexes can be combined into one ideal face. I can
well imagine a fashion setting in to have these pictures.

Professional skill might be exercised very effectively in retouching
composites. It would be easy to obliterate the ghosts of stray
features that are always present when the composite is made from
only a few portraits, and it would not be difficult to tone down any
irregularity in the features themselves, due to some obtrusive
peculiarity in one of the components. A higher order of artistic
skill might be well bestowed upon the composites that have been made
out of a large number of components. Here the irregularities
disappear, the features are perfectly regular and idealised, but the
result is dim. It is like a pencil drawing, where many attempts have
been made to obtain the desired effect; such a drawing is smudged
and ineffective; but the artist, under its guidance, draws his final
work with clear bold touches, and then he rubs out the smudge. On
precisely the same principle the faint but beautifully idealised
features of these composites are, I believe, capable of forming the
basis of a very high order of artistic work.

B.--THE RELATIVE SUPPLIES FROM TOWN AND COUNTRY FAMILIES
    TO THE POPULATION OF FUTURE GENERATIONS.

  [_Read before the Statistical Society in_ 1873.]

It is well known that the population of towns decays, and has to be
recruited by immigrants from the country, but I am not aware that
any statistical investigation has yet been attempted of the rate of
its decay. The more energetic members of our race, whose breed is
the most valuable to our nation, are attracted from the country to
our towns. If residence in towns seriously interferes with the
maintenance of their stock, we should expect the breed of Englishmen
to steadily deteriorate, so far as that particular influence is
concerned.

I am well aware that the only perfectly trustworthy way of
conducting the inquiry is by statistics derived from numerous
life-histories, but I find it very difficult to procure these data.
I therefore have had recourse to an indirect method, based on a
selection from the returns made at the census of 1871, which appears
calculated to give a fair approximation to the truth. My object is
to find the number of adult male representatives in this generation,
of 1000 adult males in the previous one, of rural and urban
populations respectively. The principle on which I have proceeded is
this:--

I find (A) the number of children of equal numbers of urban and of
rural mothers. The census schedules contain returns of the names and
ages of the members of each "family," by which word we are to
understand those members who are alive and resident in the same
house with their parents. When the mothers are young, the children
are necessarily very young, and nearly always (in at least those
classes who are unable to send their children to boarding schools)
live at home. If, therefore, we limit our inquiries to the census
"families" of young mothers, the results may be accepted as
practically identical with those we should have obtained if we had
direct means of ascertaining the number of their living children.
The limits of age of the mothers which I adopted in my selection were,
24 and 40 years. Had I to begin the work afresh, I should prefer
the period from 20 to 35, but I have reason to feel pretty well
contented with my present data. I correct the results thus far
obtained on the following grounds:--(B) the relative mortality of
the two classes between childhood and maturity; (C) the relative
mortality of the rural and urban mothers during childbearing ages;
(D) their relative celibacy; and (E) the span of a rural and urban
generation. It will be shown that B is important, and C noteworthy,
but that D and E may be disregarded.

In deciding on the districts to be investigated, it was important to
choose well-marked specimens of urban and rural populations. In the
former, a town was wanted where there were various industries, and
where the population was not increasing. A town where only one
industry was pursued would not be a fair sample, because the
particular industry might be suspected of having a special influence,
and a town that was increasing would have attracted numerous
immigrants from the country, who are undistinguishable as such in
the census returns. Guided by these considerations, I selected
Coventry, where silk weaving, watch-making, and other industries are
carried on, and whose population had scarcely varied during the
decade preceding the census of 1871.[25] It is an open town, in
which the crowded alleys of larger places are not frequent. Its urban
peculiarities are therefore minimised, and its statistical returns
would give a picture somewhat too favourable of the average
condition of life in towns. For specimens of rural districts, I
chose small agricultural parishes in Warwickshire.

[Footnote 25:  It has greatly changed since this was written.]

By the courteous permission of Dr. Farr, I was enabled to procure
extracts from the census returns concerning 1000 "families" of
factory hands at Coventry, in which the age of the mother was
neither less than 24 nor more than 40 years, and concerning another
1000 families of agricultural labourers in rural parishes of
Warwickshire, under the same limitations as to the age of the mother.
When these returns were classified (see Table I., p. 246), I found
the figures to run in such regular sequence as to make it certain
that the cases were sufficiently numerous to give trustworthy results.
It appeared that:

(A) The 1000 families of factory hands comprised 2681 children, and
the 1000 of agricultural labourers comprised 2911; hence, the
children in the urban "families," the mothers being between the ages
of 24 and 40, are on the whole about 8 per cent, less numerous than
the rural. I see no reason why these numbers should not be accepted
as relatively correct for families, in the ordinary sense of that
word, and for mothers of all ages. An inspection of the table does
indeed show that if the selection had begun at an earlier age than 24,
there would have been an increased proportion of sterile and of
small families among the factory hands, but not sufficient to
introduce any substantial modification of the above results. It is,
however, important to recollect that the small error, whatever its
amount may be, is a concession in favour of the towns.

(B) I next make an allowance for the mortality between childhood and
maturity, which will diminish the above figures in different
proportions, because the conditions of town life are more fatal to
children than those of the country. No life tables exist for
Coventry and Warwickshire; I am therefore obliged to use statistics
for similarly conditioned localities, to determine the amount of the
allowance that should be made. The life tables of Manchester [26]
will afford the data for towns, and those of the "Healthy Districts"
[27] will suffice for the country. By applying these, we could
calculate the number of the children of ages specified in the census
returns who would attain maturity. I regret extremely that when I
had the copies taken, I did not give instructions to have the ages
of all the children inserted; but I did not, and it is too late now
to remedy the omission. I am therefore obliged to make a very rough,
but not unfair, estimate. The average age of the children was about
3 years, and 25 years may be taken as representing the age of
maturity. Now it will be found that 74 per cent. of children in
Manchester, of the age of 3, reach the age of 25, while 86 per cent.
of children do so in the "Healthy Districts." Therefore, if my rough
method be accepted as approximately fair, the number of adults who
will be derived from the children of the 1000 factory families
should be reckoned at (2681 x 74/100) = 1986, and those from the
1000 agricultural at (2911 x 86/100) = 2503.

[Footnote 26:  "Seventh Annual Report of Registrar-General."]

[Footnote 27:  Healthy Districts Life Table, by Dr. Farr. _Phil
Trans. Royal Society_, 1859.]

(C) The comparison we seek is between the total families produced by
an equal number of urban and rural women who had survived the age of
24. Many of these women will not marry at all; I postpone that
consideration to the next paragraph. Many of the rest will die
before they reach the age of 40, and more of them will die in the
town than in the country. It appears from data furnished by the
above-mentioned tables, that if 100 women of the age of 24 had
annually been added to a population, the number of those so added,
living between the ages of 24 and 40 (an interval of seventeen years)
would be 1539 under the conditions of life in Manchester, and 1585
under those of the healthy districts. Therefore the small factors to
be applied respectively to the two cases, on account of this
correction, are 1539/(17 x 100) and 1585/(17 x 100).

(D)  I have no trustworthy data for the relative prevalence of
celibacy in town and country. All that I have learned from the
census returns is, that when searching them for the 1000 families,
131 bachelors were noted between the ages of 24 and 40, among the
factory hands, and 144 among the agricultural labourers. If these
figures be accepted as correct guides to the amount of celibacy
among the women, it would follow that I must be considered to have
discussed the cases of 1131 factory, and 1144 agricultural women,
when dealing with those of 1000 mothers in either class.
Consequently that the respective corrections to be applied, are
given by the factors 1000/1131 and 1000/1141 or 88.4/1000 and 87.6/
1000. This difference of less than 1 per cent, is hardly worth
applying, moreover I do not like to apply it, because it seems to me
erroneous and to act in the wrong direction, inasmuch as unmarried
women can obtain employment more readily in the town than in the
country, and celibacy is therefore more likely to be common in the
former than in the latter.

(E) The possible difference in the length of an urban and rural
generation must not be forgotten. We, however, have reason to
believe that the correction on this ground will be insignificant,
because the length of a generation is found to be constant under
very different circumstances of race, and therefore we should expect
it to be equally constant in the same race under different conditions;
such as it is, it would probably tell against the towns.

Let us now sum up the results. The corrections are not to be applied
for (D) and (E), so we have only to regard (A) x (B) x (C), that
this--

2681 x 74/100 x 1539/1700   1796   77
------------------------- = ---- = --
2911 x 86/100 x 1585/1700   2334   100

In other words, the rate of supply in towns to the next adult
generation is only 77 per cent., or, say, three-quarters of that in
the country. This decay, if it continued constant, would lead to the
result that the representatives of the townsmen would be less than
half as numerous as those of the country folk after one century, and
only about one fifth as numerous after two centuries, the
proportions being 45/100 and 21/100 respectively.


[Transcriber's Note: In the original manuscript, Table I occupied
two facing pages. This is the left-hand (sinister) page; the right-hand
(dexter) page is immediately below.]

TABLE I. -- _Census Returns of 1000 Families of Factory Hands in
Coventry, and 1000 Families of Agricultural Labourers in  Warwickshire,
grouped according to the Age of the Mother and the Number of Children
in the Family._

               ---------------------------------------------------
               |NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN FAMILY.                    |
               |---------|---------|---------|----------|--------|
               |    0.   |    1.   |    2.   |    3.    |   4.   |
               |---------+---------+---------+----------+--------|
               | F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  |
               | a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  |
               | c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  |
               | t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  |
               | o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  |
               | r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  |
Age of Mother  | y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  |
               | .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  |
               ---------------------------------------------------
24 to 25       | 28   17   40   31 | 24   32   12   10    2      |
               |                   +-------------------+         |
26  " 27       | 19   18   36   24   36   28   23   26 |  8    8 |
               |                                       |         |
28  " 29       | 18   17   32   16  20[A] 33   36   23 | 14   23 |
               |                                       |         |
30  " 31       | 13    4   23   18   24   21  28[A] 31 | 18   22 |
               |                                       |         |
32  " 33       | 18   11   16   14   19   13  22[A] 27 | 23   26 |
               |---------+                             |         |
34  " 35       | 14   15 | 11    6   17   16   28   18 | 31   34 |
               |         +-------------------+         |         |
36  " 37       | 12   17    4   11   10   13 | 22   14 | 16   20 |
               |                             +---------+         |
38  " 39       |  8    6    9   15   14   17   16   21   22   23 |
               |                                                 |
40             |  8    7    3   10    8    9   13   14    8   10 |
===============|=================================================|
Total within   |                                                 |
   outline     | 96   67  258  109  116  111  171  149           |
Total between  |                                                 |
   outlines    | 42   45   16   36   56   71   29   35  142  166 |
Total beyond   |                                                 |
   outline     |                                                 |
===============|=================================================|
Total          |138  112  174  145  172  182  200  184  142  166 |
===============|=================================================|

[Footnote A: These three cases are anomalous, the Factory being less
than the Agricultural. In the instance of 20-33, the anomaly is double,
because the sequence of the figures shows that neither of these can be
correct; certainly not the first of them.]

_Note_.--It will be observed to the left of the outline, that is,
in the upper and left hand of the table, where the mothers are young
and the children few, the factory families predominate, while the
agricultural are the most numerous between the outlines, that is,
especially in the middle of the table, where the mothers are less young,
and the family is from four to five in number. The two are equally
numerous to the right of the outlines, that is, to the right of the
table, where the families are large.

[Transcriber's Note: In the original manuscript, Table I occupied
two facing pages. This is the right-hand (dexter) page; the left-hand
(snister) page is immediately above.]

TABLE I. -- _Census Returns of 1000 Families of Factory Hands in
Coventry, and 1000 Families of Agricultural Labourers in  Warwickshire,
grouped according to the Age of the Mother and the Number of Children
in the Family._



|  NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN FAMILY.                    |
|-------------------------------------------------|
|    5.   |    6.   |    7.   |    8.   |   9.    |
|---------+---------+---------+---------+---------|
| F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  | F  | A  |
| a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  | a  | g  |
| c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  | c  | r  |
| t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  | t  | i  |
| o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  | o  | c  |
| r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  | r  | u  |
| y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  | y  | l  |Age of Mother
| .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  | .  | t  |
|---------+---------+---------+---------+---------|------------
|  1    1 |                                       |  24  to 25
|         |                                       |
|         |                                       |  26 "  27
|         |                                       |
|  6    6 |  4    1    2                          |  28 "  29
|         |                                       |
| 12   15 |  2    5         2         1           |  30 "  31
|         |                                       |
| 21   25 |  9    5         1         2           |  32 "  33
|         |                                       |
| 14   18 | 12    9    5    3         1           |  34 "  35
|         |                                       |
| 15   25 | 12   10    4    5     5   2           |  36 "  37
|         |                                       |
| 14   22 | 10   15    6    7         2    1      |  38 "  39
|         |                                       |
|  7   11 |  3    9    7    7     2   1           |  40
|=================================================|--------------------
|                                                 |Total within outline.
| 90  123                                         |Total between outline
|           52   54   24   25   7    9    1       |Total beyond outline.
|=================================================|=====================
| 90  123   52   54   24   25   7    9    1       |Total.
|=======================================================================




TABLE II.

|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                     |   Number of Families  |   Number of Children   |
|                     |--------+--------------+------------------------|
|                     | Factory| Agricultural | Factory | Agricultural |
| Within outline      |   541  |   436        |   903   |   778        |
| Between outlines    |   375  |   476        |  1233   |  1562        |
| Beyond outlines     |    84  |    88        |   545   |   571        |
|=============================================+========================|
| Total               |  1000  |  1000        |  2681   |  2911        |
|======================================================================|

C -- AN APPARATUS FOR TESTING THE DELICACY WITH WHICH WEIGHTS CAN BE
DISCRIMINATED BY HANDLING THEM.

  [_Read at the Anthropological Institute_, Nov., 1882.]

I submit a simple apparatus that I have designed to measure the
delicacy of the sensitivity of different persons, as shown by their
skill in discriminating weights, identical in size, form, and colour,
but different in specific gravity. Its interest lies in the
accordance of the successive test values with the successive
graduations of a true scale of sensitivity, in the ease with which
the tests are applied, and the fact that the same principle can be
made use of in testing the delicacy of smell and taste.

I use test-weights that mount in a series of "just perceptible
differences" to an imaginary person of extreme delicacy of perception,
their values being calculated according to Weber's law. The lowest
weight is heavy enough to give a decided sense of weight to the hand
when handling it, and the heaviest weight can be handled without any
sense of fatigue. They therefore conform with close approximation to
a geometric series; thus--
    _WR0, WR1, WR2, WR3_, etc.,
and they bear as register-marks the values of the successive indices,
0, 1, 2, 3, etc. It follows that if a person can just distinguish
between any particular pair of weights, he can also just distinguish
between any other pair of weights whose register-marks differ by the
same amount. Example: suppose A can just distinguish between the
weights bearing the register-marks 2 and 4, then it follows from the
construction of the apparatus that he can just distinguish between
those bearing the register-marks 1 and 3, or 3 and 5, or 4 and 6, etc.;
the difference being 2 in each case.

There can be but one interpretation of the phrase that the dulness
of muscular sense in any person, B, is twice as great as in that of
another person, A. It is that B is only capable of perceiving one
grade of difference where A can perceive two. We may, of course,
state the same fact inversely, and say that the delicacy of muscular
sense is in that case twice as great in A as in B. Similarly in all
other cases of the kind. Conversely, if having known nothing
previously about either A or B, we discover on trial that A can just
distinguish between two weights such as those bearing the
register-marks 5 and 7, and that B can just distinguish between
another pair, say, bearing the register-marks 2 and 6; then since
the difference between the marks in the latter case is twice as
great as in the former, we know that the dulness of the muscular
sense of B is exactly twice that of A. Their relative dulness, or if
we prefer to speak in inverse terms, and say their relative
sensitivity, is determined quite independently of the particular
pair of weights used in testing them.

It will be noted that the conversion of results obtained by the
use of one series of test-weights into what would have been given
by another series, is a piece of simple arithmetic, the fact
ultimately obtained by any apparatus of this kind being the "just
distinguishable" fraction of real weight. In my own apparatus the
unit of weight is 2 per cent.; that is, the register-mark 1 means 2
per cent.; but I introduce weights in the earlier part of the scale
that deal with half units; that is, with differences of 1 per cent.
In another apparatus the unit of weight might be 3 per cent., then
three grades of mine would be equal to two of the other, and mine
would be converted to that scale by multiplying them by 2/3. Thus
the results obtained by different apparatus are strictly comparable.

A sufficient number of test-weights must be used, or trials made, to
eliminate the influence of chance. It might perhaps be thought that
by using a series of only five weights, and requiring them to be
sorted into their proper order by the sense of touch alone, the
chance of accidental success would be too small to be worth
consideration. It might be said that there are 5 x 4 x 3 x 2, or 120
different ways in which five weights can be arranged, and as only
one is right, it must be 120 to 1 against a lucky hit. But this is
many fold too high an estimate, because the 119 possible mistakes
are by no means equally probable. When a person is tested, an
approximate value for his grade of sensitivity is rapidly found, and
the inquiry becomes narrowed to finding out whether he can surely
pass a particular mistake. He is little likely to make a mistake of
double the amount in question, and it is almost certain that he will
not make a mistake of treble the amount. In other words, he would
never be likely to put one of the test-weights more than one step
out of its proper place. If he had three weights to arrange in their
consecutive order, 1, 2, 3, there are 3x2 = 6 ways of arranging them;
of these, he would be liable to the errors of 1, 3, 2, and of 2, 1, 3,
but he would hardly be liable to such gross errors as 2, 3, 1, or 3,
2, 1, or 3, 1, 2. Therefore of the six permutations in which three
weights may be arranged three have to be dismissed from consideration,
leaving three cases only to be dealt with, of which two are wrong
and one is right. For the same reason there are only four reasonable
chances of error in arranging four weights, and only six in
arranging five weights, instead of the 119 that were originally
supposed. These are--

12354        13245        13254
21345        21354        21435

But exception might be taken to two even of these, namely, those
that appear in the third column, where 5 is found in juxtaposition
with 2 in the first case, and 4 with 1 in the second. So great a
difference between two adjacent weights would be almost sure to
attract the notice of the person who was being tested, and make him
dissatisfied with the arrangement. Considering all this, together
with the convenience of carriage and manipulation, I prefer to use
trays, each containing only three weights, the trials being made
three or four times in succession. In each trial there are three
possibilities and only one success, therefore in three trials the
probabilities against uniform success are as 27 to 1, and in four
trials at 81 to 1.

_Values of the Weights_.--After preparatory trials, I adopted 1000
grains as the value of _W_ and 1020 as that of _R_, but I am now
inclined to think that 1010 would have been better. I made the
weights by filling blank cartridges with shot, wool, and wads, so as
to distribute the weight equally, and I closed the cartridges with a
wad, turning the edges over it with the instrument well known to
sportsmen. I wrote the corresponding value of the index of _R_ on
the wad by which each of them was closed, to serve as a register
number. Thus the cartridge whose weight was _WR4_ was marked 4'. The
values were so selected that there should be as few varieties as
possible. There are thirty weights in all, but only ten varieties,
whose Register Numbers are respectively 0, 1, 2, 3, 3-1/2, 4-1/2, 5,
6, 7, 9, 12. The reason of this limitation of varieties was to
enable the weights to be interchanged whenever there became reason
to suspect that the eye had begun to recognise the appearance of any
one of them, and that the judgment might be influenced by that
recognition, and cease to be wholly guided by the sense of weight.

We are so accustomed to deal with concurrent impressions that it is
exceedingly difficult, even with the best intention of good faith,
to ignore the influence of any corroborative impression that may be
present. It is therefore right to take precautions against this
possible cause of inaccuracy. The most perfect way would be to drop
the weights, each in a little bag or sheath of light material, so
that the operatee could not see the weights, while the ratio between
the weights would not be sensibly changed by the additional weight
of the bags. I keep little bags for this purpose, inside the box
that holds the weights.

_Arrangement of the Weights_.--The weights are placed in sets of
threes, each set in a separate shallow tray, and the trays lie in
two rows in a box. Each tray bears the register-marks of each of the
weights it contains. It is also marked boldly with a Roman numeral
showing the difference between the register-marks of the adjacent
weights. This difference indicates the grade of sensitivity that the
weights in the tray are designed to test. Thus the tray containing
the weights _WR0_, _WR3_, _WR6_ is marked as in Fig. 1, and that
which contains _WR2_, _WR7_, _WR12_ is marked as in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

The following is the arrangement of the trays in the box. The
triplets they contain suffice for ordinary purposes.


|=========================================|
| Just        |             |             |
| perceptible | Grade of    | Sequences   |
| Ratio.      | Sensitivity | of Weights  |
|-------------+-------------+-------------|
| 1.020       |    I.       |  1, 2, 3    |
| 1.030       |   I.1/2     | 2, 3-1/2, 5 |
| 1.040       |    II.      |  3, 5, 7    |
| 1.050       |   II.1/2    | 2, 4-1/2, 7 |
| 1.061       |    III.     |  0, 3, 6    |
| 1.071       |  III.1/2    | 0, 3-1/2, 7 |
| 1.082       |    IV.      |  1, 5, 9    |
| 1.082       |   IV.1/2    | 0, 4-1/2, 9 |
| 1.104       |     V.      |  2, 5, 7    |
| 1.127       |    VI.      |  0, 6, 12   |
|=========================================|

But it will be observed that sequences of 1/2 can also be obtained,
and again, that it is easy to select doublets of weights for coarser
tests, up to a maximum difference of XII., which may be useful in
cases of morbidly diminished sensitivity.

_Manipulation_.--A tray is taken out, the three weights that it
contains is shuffled by the operator who then passes them on to the
experimenter. The latter sits at ease with his hand in an
unconstrained position, and lifts the weights in turn between his
finger and thumb, the finger pressing against the top, the thumb
against the bottom of the cartridge. Guided by the touch alone, he
arranges them in the tray in what he conceives to be their proper
sequence; he then returns the tray to the operator, who notes the
result, the operator then reshuffles the weights and repeats the
trial. It is necessary to begin with coarse preparatory tests, to
accustom the operatee to the character of the work. After a minute
or two the operator may begin to record results, and the testing may
go for several minutes, until the hand begins to tire, the judgment
to be confused, and blunders to arise. Practice does not seem to
increase the delicacy of perception after the first few trials, so
much as might be expected.

D.--WHISTLES FOR TESTING THE UPPER LIMITS OF AUDIBLE SOUND IN
DIFFERENT INDIVIDUALS.

The base of the inner tube of the whistle is the foremost end of a
plug, that admits of being advanced or withdrawn by screwing it out
or in; thus the depth of the inner tube of the whistle can be varied
at pleasure. The more nearly the plug is screwed home, the less is
the depth of the whistle and the more shrill does its note become,
until a point is reached at which, although the air that proceeds
from it vibrates as violently as before, as shown by its effect on a
sensitive flame, the note ceases to be audible.

The number of vibrations per second in the note of a whistle or
other "closed pipe" depends on its depth. The theory of acoustics
shows that the length of each complete vibration is four times that
of the depth of the closed pipe, and since experience proves that
all sound, whatever may be its pitch, is propagated at the same rate,
which under ordinary conditions of temperature and barometric
pressure may be taken at 1120 feet, or 13,440 inches per second,--it
follows that the number of vibrations in the note of a whistle may
be found by dividing 13,440 by four times the depth, measured in
inches, of the inner tube of the whistle. This rule, however,
supposes the vibrations of the air in the tube to be strictly
longitudinal, and ceases to apply when the depth of the tube is less
than about one and a half times its diameter. When the tube is
reduced to a shallow pan, a note may still be produced by it, but
that note has reference rather to the diameter of the whistle than
to its depth, being sometimes apparently unaltered by a further
decrease of depth. The necessity of preserving a fair proportion
between the diameter and the depth of a whistle is the reason why
these instruments, having necessarily little depth, require to be
made with very small bores.

The depth of the inner tube of the whistle at any moment is shown by
the graduations on the outside of the instrument. The lower portion
of the instrument as formerly made for me by the late Mr. Tisley,
optician, Brompton Road,[28] is a cap that surrounds the body of the
whistle, and is itself fixed to the screw that forms the plug. One
complete turn of the cap increases or diminishes the depth of the whistle,
by an amount equal to the interval between two adjacent threads of the
screw. For mechanical convenience, a screw is used whose pitch is 25 to
the inch; therefore one turn of the cap moves the plug one twenty-fifth
of an inch, or ten two-hundred-and-fiftieths. The edge of the cap is
divided into ten parts, each of which corresponds to the tenth of a
complete turn; and, therefore, to one two-hundred-and-fiftieth of an
inch. Hence in reading off the graduations the tens are shown on the
body of the whistle, and the units are shown on the edge of the cap.

The scale of the instrument having for its unit the two-hundred-and-
fiftieth part of an inch, it follows that the number of vibrations
in the note of the whistle is to be found by dividing (13440 x 250)/4
or 84,000, by the graduations read off on its scale.

A short table is annexed, giving the number of vibrations calculated
by this formula, for different depths, bearing in mind that the
earlier entries cannot be relied upon unless the whistle has a very
minute bore, and consequently a very feeble note.

===================================
| Scale Readings |  Corresponding |
| (one division  |  Number of     |
|  = 1/250       |  Vibrations    |
|  of an inch).  |  per Second    |
|----------------+----------------|
|      10        |      84,000    |
|      15        |      56,000    |
|      20        |      42,000    |
|      25        |      33,600    |
|      30        |      28,000    |
|      35        |      24,000    |
|      40        |      21,000    |
|      45        |      28,666    |
|      50        |      16,800    |
|      55        |      15,273    |
|      60        |      14,000    |
|      65        |      12,923    |
|      70        |      12,000    |
|      75        |      11,200    |
|      80        |      10,500    |
|      85        |       9,882    |
|      90        |       9,333    |
|      95        |       8,842    |
|     100        |       8,400    |
|     105        |       8,000    |
|     110        |       7,591    |
|     115        |       7,305    |
|     120        |       7,000    |
|     125        |       6,720    |
|     130        |       6,461    |
===================================

[Footnote 28: Mr. Hawksley, surgical instrument maker 307 Oxford
Street also makes these.]

The largest whistles suitable for experiments on the human ear, have
an inner tube of about 0.16 inches in diameter, which is equal to 40
units of the scale. Consequently in these instruments the theory of
closed pipes ceases to be trustworthy when the depth of the whistle
is less than about 60 units. In short, we cannot be sure of sounding
with them a higher note than one of 14,000 vibrations to the second,
unless we use tubes of still smaller bore. In some of my experiments
I was driven to use very fine tubes indeed, not wider than those
little glass tubes that hold the smallest leads for Mordan's pencils.
I have tried without much success to produce a note that should be
both shrill and powerful, and correspond to a battery of small
whistles, by flattening a piece of brass tube, and passing another
sheet of brass up it, and thus forming a whistle the whole width of
the sheet, but of very small diameter from front to back. It made a
powerful note, but not a very pure one. I also constructed an
annular whistle by means of three cylinders, one sliding within the
other two, and graduated as before.

When the limits of audibility are approached, the sound becomes much
fainter, and when that limit is reached, the sound usually gives
place to a peculiar sensation, which is not sound but more like
dizziness, and which some persons experience to a high degree. Young
people hear shriller sounds than older people, and I am told there
is a proverb in Dorsetshire, that no agricultural labourer who is
more than forty years old, can hear a bat squeak. The power of
hearing shrill notes has nothing to do with sharpness of hearing,
any more than a wide range of the key-board of a piano has to do
with the sound of the individual strings. We all have our limits,
and that limit may be quickly found by these whistles in every case.
The facility of hearing shrill sounds depends in some degree on the
position of the whistle, for it is highest when it is held exactly
opposite the opening of the ear. Any roughness of the lining of the
auditory canal appears to have a marked effect in checking the
transmission of rapid vibrations when they strike the ear obliquely.
I myself feel this in a marked degree, and I have long noted the
fact in respect to the buzz of a mosquito. I do not hear the
mosquito much as it flies about, but when it passes close by my ear
I hear a "ping," the suddenness of which is very striking. Mr. Dalby,
the aurist, to whom I gave one of these instruments, tells me he
uses it for diagnoses. When the power of hearing high notes is
wholly lost, the loss is commonly owing to failure in the nerves,
but when very deaf people are still able to hear high notes if they
are sounded with force, the nerves are usually all right, and the
fault lies in the lining of the auditory canal.

E.--QUESTIONS ON VISUALISING AND OTHER ALLIED FACULTIES.

The Questions that I circulated were as follows; there was an
earlier and uncomplete form, which I need not reproduce here.

The object of these Questions is to elicit the degree in which
different persons possess the power of seeing images in their mind's
eye, and of reviving past sensations.

From inquiries I have already made, it appears that remarkable
variations exist both in the strength and in the quality of these
faculties, and it is highly probable that a statistical inquiry into
them will throw light upon more than one psychological problem.

Before addressing yourself to any of the Questions on the opposite
page, think of some definite object--suppose it is your
breakfast-table as you sat down to it this morning--and consider
carefully the picture that rises before your mind's eye.

1. _Illumination_.--Is the image dim or fairly clear? Is its
brightness comparable to that of the actual scene?

2. _Definition_.--Are all the objects pretty well defined at the
same time, or is the place of sharpest definition at any one moment
more contracted than it is in a real scene?

3. _Colouring_.--Are the colours of the china, of the toast, bread
crust, mustard, meat, parsley, or whatever may have been on the table,
quite distinct and natural?

4. _Extent of field of view_.--Call up the image of some panoramic
view (the walls of your room might suffice), can you force yourself
to see mentally a wider range of it than could be taken in by any
single glance of the eyes? Can you mentally see more than three
faces of a die, or more than one hemisphere of a globe at the same
instant of time?

5. _Distance of images_.--Where do mental images appear to be
situated? within the head, within the eye-ball, just in front of the
eyes, or at a distance corresponding to reality?   Can you project
an image upon a piece of paper?

6. _Command over images_.--Can you retain a mental picture steadily
before the eyes? When you do so, does it grow brighter or dimmer?
When the act of retaining it becomes wearisome, in what part of the
head or eye-ball is the fatigue felt?

7. _Persons_.--Can you recall with distinctness the features of all
near relations and many other persons?    Can you at will cause your
mental image of any or most of them to sit, stand, or turn slowly
round?   Can you deliberately seat the image of a well-known person
in a chair and see it with enough distinctness to enable you to
sketch it leisurely (supposing yourself able to draw)?

8. _Scenery_.--Do you preserve the recollection of scenery with much
precision of detail, and do you find pleasure in dwelling on it? Can
you easily form mental pictures from the descriptions of scenery
that are so frequently met with in novels and books of travel?

9. _Comparison with reality_.--What difference do you perceive
between a very vivid mental picture called up in the dark, and a
real scene? Have you ever mistaken a mental image for a reality when
in health and wide awake?

10. _Numerals and dates_.--Are these invariably associated in your
mind with any peculiar mental imagery, whether of written or printed
figures, diagrams, or colours? If so, explain fully, and say if you
can account for the association?

11.--_Specialities_.--If you happen to have special aptitudes for
mechanics, mathematics (either geometry of three dimensions or pure
analysis), mental arithmetic, or chess-playing blindfold, please
explain fully how far your processes depend on the use of visual
images, and how far otherwise?

12. Call up before your imagination the objects specified in the six
following paragraphs, numbered A to F, and consider carefully
whether your mental representation of them generally, is in each
group very faint, faint, fair, good, or vivid and comparable to the
actual sensation:--

  A. _Light and colour_.--An evenly clouded sky (omitting all landscape),
   first bright, then gloomy. A thick surrounding haze, first white,
   then successively blue, yellow, green, and red.

  B. _Sound_.--The beat of rain against the window panes, the crack of
   a whip, a church bell, the hum of bees, the whistle of a railway,
   the clinking of tea-spoons and saucers, the slam of a door.

  C. _Smells_.--Tar, roses, an oil-lamp blown out, hay, violets, a fur
   coat, gas, tobacco.

  D. _Tastes_.--Salt,  sugar, lemon juice,   raisins,  chocolate,
   currant jelly.

  E. _Touch_.--Velvet, silk, soap, gum, sand, dough, a crisp dead leaf,
   the prick of a pin.

  F. _Other sensations_.--Heat, hunger, cold, thirst, fatigue, fever,
   drowsiness, a bad cold.

13. _Music_.--Have you any aptitude for mentally recalling music, or
for imagining it?

14. _At different ages_.--Do you recollect what your powers of
visualising, etc., were in childhood? Have they varied much within
your recollection?

_General remarks_.--Supplementary information written here, or on
a separate piece of paper, will be acceptable.




INDEX

  _For an analysis of the several chapters, see Table of Contents._

Abbadie, A. d'
Aborigines
About, E.
Abstract ideas,
  like composite portraits;
  are formed with difficulty
Admiralty, records of lives of sailors
Adoption
Africa,
  oxen;
  captive animals;
  races of men
_Alert_, H.M.S.,
  the crew of
Alexander the Great,
  medals of;
  his help to Aristotle
America,
  captive animals;
  change of population
Animals and birds,
  their attachments and aversions
ANTECHAMBER OF CONSCIOUSNESS
ANTHROPOMETRIC REGISTERS;
  anthropometric committee;
  laboratories
Appold, Mr.
Arabs,
  their migrations
Ashurakbal,
  his menagerie
ASSOCIATIONS
  (_see also_ Psychometric experiments)
Assyria,
  captive animals
Athletic feats in present and past generations
Augive, or ogive
Austin, A.L.
Australia,
  tame kites;
  change of population
Automatic thought
Aversion

Barclay, Capt.,
  of Uri
Barrel
Barth, Dr.
Bates, W.H.
Baume, Dr.
Belief (_ie_ Faith)
Bevington, Miss L.
Bible, family
Bidder, G.
Blackburne, Mr.
Blake, the artist
Bleuler and Lehman
Blind, the
Blood, terror at
BODILY QUALITIES
Boisbaudran, Lecoq de
Breaking out (violent passion)
Brierre de Boismont
Bruhl, Prof.
Burton, Capt.
Bushmen,
  their skill in drawing;
  in Damara Land

Campbell, J. (of Islay)
Candidates, selection of
Captive Animals (_see_ Domestication of Animals)
Cats can hear very shrill notes
Cattle,
  their terror at blood;
  gregariousness of;
  renders them easy to tend;
  cow guarding her newly-born calf;
  cattle highly prized by Damaras
Celibacy as a religious exercise;
  effect of endowments upon;
  prudential;
  to prevent continuance of an inferior race
Centesimal grades
Chance, influence of, in test experiments
Change, love of, characteristic of civilised man
CHARACTER;
  observations on at schools;
  changing phases of
Charterhouse College
Cheltenham College
Chess, played blindfold
Children,
  mental imagery;
  associations;
  effect of illness on growth of head;
  moral impressions on;
  they and their parents understand each other;
  can hear shrill notes
Chinese, the
Clock face, origin of some Number-Forms
Colleges, celibacy of Fellows of
COLOUR ASSOCIATIONS
  (_see_ also chap. on Visionaries);
  colour blindness
Comfort, love of, a condition of domesticability
Competitive examinations
COMPOSITE PORTRAITURE;
  also Memoirs I., II., and III. in Appendix
Composite origin of some visions;
  of ideas;
  of memories
Composition,
  automatic;
  literary
CONCLUSION
Conscience,
  defective in criminals;
  its origin
Consciousness
  (_see_ Antechamber of);
  ignorance of its relation to the unconscious lives of cells of organism;
  its limited ken
Consumption, types of features connected with
Cooper, Miss

CRIMINALS AND THE INSANE;
  criminals, their features;
  their peculiarities of character;
  their children

Cromwell's soldiers

Cuckoo


DALTON,
  colour blindness
  was a Quaker

Damaras,
  their grade of sensitivity;
  their wild cattle and gregariousness;
  their pride in them;
  races of men in Damara Land

Dante

Darwin, Charles,
  impulse given by him to new lines of thought;
  on conscience;
  notes on twins;
  letter of Mr. A. L. Austin forwarded by

Darwin, Lieut., R.E.,
  photographs of Royal Engineers

Deaf-mutes

Death, fear of; its orderly occurrence;
death and reproduction of
cells, and their unknown relation to
consciousness

Despine, Prosper

Difference, verbal difficulty in defining
many grades of

Discipline, ascetic

_Discovery_, H.M.S., the crew of

Discrimination of weights by handling
them, etc.

Dividualism; also

Doctrines, diversity of

Dogs, their capacity for hearing shrill
notes

DOMESTICATION OF ANIMALS

Dreaming

Du Cane, Sir E.

Duncan, Dr. Mathews


EARLSWOOD ASYLUM for idiots

EARLY AND LATE MARRIAGES

EARLY SENTIMENTS

Ecstasy

Editors of newspapers

Egg, raw and boiled, when spun

Egypt, captive animals

Ellis, Rev. Mr. (Polynesia)

Emigrants, value of their breed;
migration of barbarian races

ENDOWMENTS

ENERGY

Engineers, Royal, features of

English race, change of type; colour
of hair; one direction in which
it might be improved; change
of stature; various components of

ENTHUSIASM

Epileptic constitution

Eskimo, faculty of drawing and map-making

Eugenic, definition of the word

Events, observed order of

Evolution, its effects are always behind-hand;
its slow progress; man
should deliberately further it

Exiles, families of

Experiments, psychometric


FACES seen in the fire, on wall paper, etc.,

Faith

Family likenesses; records; merit,
marks for

Fashion, changes of

Fasting, visions caused by;
fasting girls

FEATURES

Fellows of colleges

Fertility at different ages; is small
in highly-bred animals

Fire-faces

First Cause, an enigma

Flame, sensitive, and high notes

Fleas are healthful stimuli to animals

Fluency of language and ideas

Forest clearing

Forms  in which numerals  are seen  (_see_
Number-Forms); months; letters;
dates

Foxes, preservation of

France, political persecution in

French, the, imaginative faculty of

Friends, the Society of (_see_ Quakers)


GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA

Generations, length of and effect in population;
in town and country
populations

Generic images; theory of

Geometric series of test-objects; geometric mean

Gerard, Jules

Gesture-language

Gibbon, amphitheatrical shows

Goethe and his visualised rose

Gomara

Goodwin, Mr.

Grades, deficiency of in language;
centesimal

Graham, Dr., on idiots (note)

GREGARIOUS AND SLAVISH INSTINCTS;
gregariousness of cattle;
gregarious animals quickly learn from
one another

Gull, Sir W., on vigour of members of
large families; on medical life-histories

Guy's Hospital Reports (consumptive
types)

Gypsies


HAIR, colour of

Hall, Capt.

Hallucinations, cases of; origin of;
of great men

Handwriting; of twins

Hanwell Asylum, lunatics when at exercise

Hatherley, Lord
Haweis, Mrs.,
  words and faces;
  visions,
Head measured for curve of growth
Hearne (N. America)
Height, comparative, of present and past
  generation,
Henslow, Rev. G.,
  imagery;
  Number-Forms;
  visions,
Heredity, the family tie;
  of colour blindness in Quakers;
  of criminality;
  of faculty of visualising;
  of seeing Number-Forms;
  of colour associations with sound;
  of seership;
  of enthusiasm;
  of character and its help in the teaching
  of children by their parents;
  that of a good stock is a valuable patrimony,
Hershon, Mr., the Talmud,
Hill, Rev. A.D.,
Hippocrates and snake symbol,
History of twins,
Holbein,
Holland, F.M.,
Hottentots, keenness of sight,
  (_see_ Bushmen)
Human Nature, variety of,
Humanity of the future, power of present
  generation of men upon it,
Hutchinson, Mr.,
Huxley, Professor,
  on sucking pigs in New Guinea;
  generic images,
Hysteria,

Idiots, deficient in energy; in sensitivity,
Illness, permanent effect on growth,
Illumination, method of regulating it
  when making composites;
  requires to be controlled,
Illusions, (_see_ also Hallucinations, cases of)
Imagery, mental,
Indian Civil Service, candidates for,
Individuality, doubt of among the insane,
  among the sane,
Influence of Man upon race,
Insane, the,
  similar forms of it in twins,
Inspiration analogous to ordinary fluency,
  morbid forms of,
Instability,
Instincts, variety of,
  criminal;
  slavish (_see_ chapter on Gregarious and
  Slavish Instincts)
Intellectual differences,

Jesuits in S. America,
Jukes, criminal family,

Kensington Gardens, the promenaders in,
Key, Dr. J.,
Kingsley, Miss R.,
Kirk, Sir John,

Laboratories, anthropometric,
Larden, W.,
Legros, Prof.,
Lehman and Bleuler, (note)
Letters, association of colour with,
Lewis, G.H.,
Lewis, Miss,
Life-histories, their importance,
Livingstone, Dr.,
Longevity of families,

Macalister, Dr.,
M'Leod, Prof. H.,
Madness (_see_ Insanity)
Mahomed, Dr.,
Malthus;
  marriage portions,
Man, his influence upon race,
Mann, Dr.,
Marks for family merit,
Marlborough College,
Marriages,
  early and late,
  with persons of good race;
  marriage portions;
  of Fellows of Colleges;
  promotion of,
Medians and quartiles,
Memory,
  physiological basis of;
  confusion of separate memories,
Mental imagery,
Meredith, Mrs.,
Milk offered by she-goats and wolves to children,
Moors, migrations of the,
Moreau, Dr. J. (of Tours),
Morphy, P.,
Muscular and accompanying senses, tests of,
Mussulmans,
  small fear of death;
  things clean and unclean,

Namaquas in Damara Land,
  (_see_ also Bushmen)
Napoleon I.,
  views in connection with the
  faculty of visualising;
  his star,
Nature (_see_ Nurture and Nature)
Necessitarianism,
Negro displaced by Berbers;
  by Bushmen;
  exported as slaves;
  replaceable by Chinese,
Nervous irritability, as distinct from sensitivity,
New Guinea,
Nicholson, Sir C.,
Notes, audibility of very shrill,
Nourse, Prof. J.E.,
Number-forms,
Numerals, their nomenclature;
  characters assigned to them;
  coloured,
Nurture and nature;
  history of twins,
Nussbaumer, brothers,

Observed order of events,
Octiles,
Ogive (statistical curve)

Osborn, Mr.
Osten Sacken, Baron v.
Oswell, Mr.
Oxen (_see_ Cattle)

Parkyns, Mansfield
Peculiarities, unconsciousness of
Persecution, its effect on the character of races
Peru, captive animals in
Pet animals
Petrie, Flinders
Phantasmagoria
Photographic composites (_see_ Composite Portraiture);
  registers;
  summed effect of a thousand brief exposures;
  order of exposure is indifferent
Phthisis, typical features of
Piety, morbid forms of, in the epileptic and insane;
  in the hysterical
Pigafetta
Polynesia, pet eels
Ponies, their capacity for hearing shrill notes
Poole, R. Stuart
Poole, W.H.
Population
  population in town and country;
  changes of;
  decays of;
  effects of early marriages on
Portraits, composite (_see_ Composite Portraiture);
  number of elements in a portrait;
  the National Portrait Gallery
Prejudices instilled by doctrinal teachers;
  affect the judgments of able men
Presence-chamber in mind
Pricker for statistical records
Princeton College, U.S.
Prisms, double image
Proudfoot, Mr.
Psychometric experiments
Puritans

Quakers, frequency of colour blindness
Quartiles
Questions on visualising and other allied faculties
Quetelet

Race and Selection;
  influence of man upon;
  variety and number of races in different countries;
  sexual apathy of decaying races;
  signs of superior race;
  pride in being of good race
Races established to discover the best horses to breed from
Rapp, General
Rapture, religious
Rayleigh, Lord, sensitive flame and high notes
Reindeer, difficulty of taming
Religion
Renaissance
Republic of self-reliant men;
  of life generally;
  cosmic
Revivals, religious
Richardson, Sir John
Roberts, C. (note)
Roget, J.
Rome, wild animals captured for use of
Rosiere, marriage portion to

Sailors, keenness of eyesight tested;
  admiralty life-histories of
_St. James's Gazette_ (Phantasmagoria)
Savages, eyesight of
Schools, biographical notes at;
  opportunities of masters;
  observation of characters at
Schuster, Prof.
Seal in pond, a simile;
  captured and tamed
Seemann, Dr.
Seers (_see_ chapter on Visionaries);
  heredity of
Segregation, passionate terror at among cattle
Selection and race
Self, becoming less personal
Sensitivity
Sentiments, early
Sequence of test weights
Serpent worship
Servility (_see_ Gregarious and Slavish Instincts);
  its romantic side
Sexual differences in sensitivity;
  in character;
  apathy in highly-bred animals
Siberia, change of population in
Slavishness (_see_ Gregarious and Slavish Instincts)
Smith, B. Woodd;
  curious Number-Form communicated by
Smythe, G.F.
Snakes, horror of some persons at;
  antipathy to, not common among mankind
Socrates and his catalepsy
Solitude
Sound, association of colour with
Space and time
Spain, the races in
Speke, Capt.
Spencer, H., blended outlines
Spiritual sense, the
Stars of great men
Statistical methods;
  statistical constancy;
  that of republics of self-reliant men;
  statistics of mental imagery;
  pictorial statistics
Stature of the English
Steinitz, Mr.
Stones, Miss
Stow, Mr.
Suna, his menagerie

Talbot Fox
Talmud, frequency of the different numerals in
Tameness, learned when young;
  tame cattle preserved to breed from
Tastes, changes in
Terror at snakes;
  at blood;
  is easily taught
Test objects, weights, etc.
Time and space
Town and country population
Trousseau, Dr.
Turner, the painter
Twins, the history of
Typical centre
Tyranny

Ulloa
Unclean, the, and the clean
Unconcsciousness of peculiarities;
  in visionaries

Variety of human nature
Visionaries;
  visionary families and races

Watches, magnetised
Welch, Mrs. Kempe
West Indies, change, of population in
Wheel and barrel
Whistles for audibility of shrill notes
Wildness taught young
Wilkes, Capt.
Winchester College
Wollaston, Dr.
Wolves, children suckled by
Women, relative sensitivity of;
  coyness and caprice;
  visualising faculty
Woodfield, Mr. (Australia)
Words, visualised pictures associated with
Workers, solitary

Young, Dr.
Yule, Colonel

Zebras, hard to tame
Zoological Gardens, whistles tried at;
  snakes fed;
  seal at
Zukertort, Mr.

##############################################################################
## THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH — Wallace Wattles (1910) — New Thought visualization: holding a clear mental image, the ancestor of manifestation scripts
##############################################################################

Produced by Craig Kirkwood and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WALLACE D. WATTLES.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH


  BY
  W. D. WATTLES
  Author of “New Science of Living
  and Healing.”

  PRICE, $1.00

  PUBLISHED BY
  ELIZABETH TOWNE
  HOLYOKE, MASS.
  1910

       *       *       *       *       *

  COPYRIGHT, APRIL 1, 1910
  BY
  WALLACE D. WATTLES




CONTENTS


                                                          PAGE

     I. THE RIGHT TO BE RICH                                 9

    II. THERE IS A SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH                  15

   III. IS OPPORTUNITY MONOPOLIZED                          23

    IV. THE FIRST PRINCIPLE IN THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH  31

     V. INCREASING LIFE                                     42

    VI. HOW RICHES COME TO YOU                              53

   VII. GRATITUDE                                           63

  VIII. THINKING IN A CERTAIN WAY                           71

    IX. HOW TO USE THE WILL                                 80

     X. FURTHER USE OF THE WILL                             89

    XI. ACTING IN THE CERTAIN WAY                           99

   XII. EFFICIENT ACTION                                   110

  XIII. GETTING INTO THE RIGHT BUSINESS                    119

   XIV. THE IMPRESSION OF INCREASE                         127

    XV. THE ADVANCING MAN                                  135

   XVI. SOME CAUTIONS, AND CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS         143

  XVII. SUMMARY OF THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH             152




PREFACE.


This book is pragmatical, not philosophical; a practical manual, not
a treatise upon theories. It is intended for the men and women whose
most pressing need is for money; who wish to get rich first, and
philosophize afterward. It is for those who have, so far, found neither
the time, the means, nor the opportunity to go deeply into the study
of metaphysics, but who want results and who are willing to take the
conclusions of science as a basis for action, without going into all
the processes by which those conclusions were reached.

It is expected that the reader will take the fundamental statements
upon faith, just as he would take statements concerning a law of
electrical action if they were promulgated by a Marconi or an Edison;
and, taking the statements upon faith, that he will prove their truth
by acting upon them without fear or hesitation. Every man or woman who
does this will certainly get rich; for the science herein applied is an
exact science, and failure is impossible. For the benefit, however, of
those who wish to investigate philosophical theories and so secure a
logical basis for faith, I will here cite certain authorities.

The monistic theory of the universe--the theory that One is All, and
that All is One; that one Substance manifests itself as the seeming
many elements of the material world--is of Hindu origin, and has been
gradually winning its way into the thought of the western world for two
hundred years. It is the foundation of all the Oriental philosophies,
and of those of Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Schopenhauer, Hegel, and
Emerson.

The reader who would dig to the philosophical foundations is advised
to read Hegel and Emerson; and he will do well to read “The Eternal
News,” a very excellent pamphlet published by J. J. Brown, 300 Cathcart
Road, Govanhill, Glasgow, Scotland. He may also find some help in a
series of articles written by the author, which were published in
_Nautilus_ (Holyoke, Mass.) during the spring and summer of 1909, under
the title “What is Truth?”

In writing this book I have sacrificed all other considerations to
plainness and simplicity of style, so that all might understand. The
plan of action laid down herein was deduced from the conclusions of
philosophy; it has been thoroughly tested, and bears the supreme
test of practical experiment; it works. If you wish to know how the
conclusions were arrived at, read the writings of the authors mentioned
above; and if you wish to reap the fruits of their philosophies in
actual practice, read this book and do exactly as it tells you to do.

  THE AUTHOR.




CHAPTER I. THE RIGHT TO BE RICH.


Whatever may be said in praise of poverty, the fact remains that it is
not possible to live a really complete or successful life unless one is
rich. No man can rise to his greatest possible height in talent or soul
development unless he has plenty of money; for to unfold the soul and
to develop talent he must have many things to use, and he cannot have
these things unless he has money to buy them with.

Man develops in mind, soul, and body by making use of things, and
society is so organized that man must have money in order to become the
possessor of things; therefore, the basis of all advancement for man
must be the science of getting rich.

The object of all life is development; and everything that lives has an
inalienable right to all the development it is capable of attaining.

Man’s right to life means his right to have the free and unrestricted
use of all the things which may be necessary to his fullest mental,
spiritual, and physical unfoldment; or, in other words, his right to be
rich.

In this book, I shall not speak of riches in a figurative way; to be
really rich does not mean to be satisfied or contented with a little.
No man ought to be satisfied with a little if he is capable of using
and enjoying more. The purpose of Nature is the advancement and
unfoldment of life; and every man should have all that can contribute
to the power, elegance, beauty, and richness of life; to be content
with less is sinful.

The man who owns all he wants for the living of all the life he is
capable of living is rich; and no man who has not plenty of money can
have all he wants. Life has advanced so far, and become so complex,
that even the most ordinary man or woman requires a great amount of
wealth in order to live in a manner that even approaches completeness.
Every person naturally wants to become all that he is capable of
becoming; this desire to realize innate possibilities is inherent in
human nature; we cannot help wanting to be all that we can be. Success
in life is becoming what you want to be; you can become what you want
to be only by making use of things, and you can have the free use
of things only as you become rich enough to buy them. To understand
the science of getting rich is therefore the most essential of all
knowledge.

There is nothing wrong in wanting to get rich. The desire for riches
is really the desire for a richer, fuller, and more abundant life; and
that desire is praiseworthy. The man who does not desire to live more
abundantly is abnormal, and so the man who does not desire to have
money enough to buy all he wants is abnormal.

There are three motives for which we live; we live for the body, we
live for the mind, and we live for the soul. No one of these is better
or holier than the other; all are alike desirable, and no one of the
three--body, mind, or soul--can live fully if either of the others is
cut short of full life and expression. It is not right or noble to live
only for the soul and deny mind or body; and it is wrong to live for
the intellect and deny body and soul.

We are all acquainted with the loathsome consequences of living for
the body and denying both mind and soul; and we see that real life
means the complete expression of all that man can give forth through
body, mind, and soul. Whatever he may say, no man can be really happy
or satisfied unless his body is living fully in every function,
and unless the same is true of his mind and his soul. Wherever
there is unexpressed possibility, or function not performed, there
is unsatisfied desire. Desire is possibility seeking expression, or
function seeking performance.

Man cannot live fully in body without good food, comfortable clothing,
and warm shelter; and without freedom from excessive toil. Rest and
recreation are also necessary to his physical life.

He cannot live fully in mind without books and time to study them,
without opportunity for travel and observation, or without intellectual
companionship.

To live fully in mind he must have intellectual recreations, and must
surround himself with all the objects of art and beauty he is capable
of using and appreciating.

To live fully in soul, man must have love; and love is denied
expression by poverty.

Man’s highest happiness is found in the bestowal of benefits on those
he loves; love finds its most natural and spontaneous expression in
giving. The man who has nothing to give cannot fill his place as a
husband or father, as a citizen, or as a man. It is in the use of
material things that man finds full life for his body, develops his
mind, and unfolds his soul. It is therefore of supreme importance to
him that he should be rich.

It is perfectly right that you should desire to be rich; if you are a
normal man or woman you cannot help doing so. It is perfectly right
that you should give your best attention to the Science of Getting
Rich, for it is the noblest and most necessary of all studies. If you
neglect this study, you are derelict in your duty to yourself, to God,
and to humanity; for you can render God and humanity no greater service
than to make the most of yourself.




CHAPTER II. THERE IS A SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


There is a Science of getting rich, and it is an exact science, like
algebra or arithmetic. There are certain laws which govern the process
of acquiring riches; once these laws are learned and obeyed by any man,
he will get rich with mathematical certainty.

The ownership of money and property comes as a result of doing things
in a certain way; those who do things in this Certain Way, whether on
purpose or accidentally, get rich; while those who do not do things in
this Certain Way, no matter how hard they work or how able they are,
remain poor.

It is a natural law that like causes always produce like effects; and,
therefore, any man or woman who learns to do things in this Certain
Way will infallibly get rich.

That the above statement is true is shown by the following facts:--

Getting rich is not a matter of environment, for, if it were, all the
people in certain neighborhoods would become wealthy; the people of one
city would all be rich, while those of other towns would all be poor;
or the inhabitants of one state would roll in wealth, while those of an
adjoining state would be in poverty.

But everywhere we see rich and poor living side by side, in the same
environment, and often engaged in the same vocations. When two men are
in the same locality, and in the same business, and one gets rich while
the other remains poor, it shows that getting rich is not, primarily,
a matter of environment. Some environments may be more favorable
than others, but when two men in the same business are in the same
neighborhood, and one gets rich while the other fails, it indicates
that getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

And further, the ability to do things in this Certain Way is not due
solely to the possession of talent, for many people who have great
talent remain poor, while others who have very little talent get rich.

Studying the people who have got rich, we find that they are an average
lot in all respects, having no greater talents and abilities than other
men. It is evident that they do not get rich because they possess
talents and abilities that other men have not, but because they happen
to do things in a Certain Way.

Getting rich is not the result of saving, or “thrift”; many very
penurious people are poor, while free spenders often get rich.

Nor is getting rich due to doing things which others fail to do; for
two men in the same business often do almost exactly the same things,
and one gets rich while the other remains poor or becomes a bankrupt.

From all these things, we must come to the conclusion that getting rich
is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

If getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way, and if
like causes always produce like effects, then any man or woman who can
do things in that way can become rich, and the whole matter is brought
within the domain of exact science.

The question arises here, whether this Certain Way may not be so
difficult that only a few may follow it. This cannot be true, as we
have seen, so far as natural ability is concerned. Talented people get
rich, and blockheads get rich; intellectually brilliant people get
rich, and very stupid people get rich; physically strong people get
rich, and weak and sickly people get rich.

Some degree of ability to think and understand is, of course,
essential; but in so far as natural ability is concerned, any man
or woman who has sense enough to read and understand these words can
certainly get rich.

Also, we have seen that it is not a matter of environment. Location
counts for something; one would not go to the heart of the Sahara and
expect to do successful business.

Getting rich involves the necessity of dealing with men, and of being
where there are people to deal with; and if these people are inclined
to deal in the way you want to deal, so much the better. But that is
about as far as environment goes.

If anybody else in your town can get rich, so can you; and if anybody
else in your state can get rich, so can you.

Again, it is not a matter of choosing some particular business or
profession. People get rich in every business, and in every profession;
while their next door neighbors in the same vocation remain in poverty.

It is true that you will do best in a business which you like, and
which is congenial to you; and if you have certain talents which are
well developed, you will do best in a business which calls for the
exercise of those talents.

Also, you will do best in a business which is suited to your locality;
an ice-cream parlor would do better in a warm climate than in
Greenland, and a salmon fishery will succeed better in the Northwest
than in Florida, where there are no salmon.

But, aside from these general limitations, getting rich is not
dependent upon your engaging in some particular business, but upon your
learning to do things in a Certain Way. If you are now in business, and
anybody else in your locality is getting rich in the same business,
while you are _not_ getting rich, it is because you are not doing
things in the same Way that the other person is doing them.

No one is prevented from getting rich by lack of capital. True, as you
get capital the increase becomes more easy and rapid; but one who has
capital is already rich, and does not need to consider how to become
so. No matter how poor you may be, if you begin to do things in the
Certain Way you will begin to get rich; and you will begin to have
capital. The getting of capital is a part of the process of getting
rich; and it is a part of the result which invariably follows the doing
of things in the Certain Way.

You may be the poorest man on the continent, and be deeply in debt; you
may have neither friends, influence, nor resources; but if you begin to
do things in this Way, you must infallibly begin to get rich, for like
causes must produce like effects. If you have no capital, you can get
capital; if you are in the wrong business, you can get into the right
business; if you are in the wrong location, you can go to the right
location; and you can do so _by beginning in your present business and
in your present location_ to do things in the Certain Way which causes
success.




CHAPTER III. IS OPPORTUNITY MONOPOLIZED?


No man is kept poor because opportunity has been taken away from him;
because other people have monopolized the wealth, and have put a fence
around it. You may be shut off from engaging in business in certain
lines, but there are other channels open to you. Probably it would be
hard for you to get control of any of the great railroad systems; that
field is pretty well monopolized. But the electric railway business
is still in its infancy, and offers plenty of scope for enterprise;
and it will be but a very few years until traffic and transportation
through the air will become a great industry, and in all its branches
will give employment to hundreds of thousands, and perhaps to millions,
of people. Why not turn your attention to the development of aerial
transportation, instead of competing with J. J. Hill and others for a
chance in the steam railway world?

It is quite true that if you are a workman in the employ of the steel
trust you have very little chance of becoming the owner of the plant in
which you work; but it is also true that if you will commence to act
in a Certain Way, you can soon leave the employ of the steel trust;
you can buy a farm of from ten to forty acres, and engage in business
as a producer of foodstuffs. There is great opportunity at this time
for men who will live upon small tracts of land and cultivate the same
intensively; such men will certainly get rich. You may say that it is
impossible for you to get the land, but I am going to prove to you that
it is not impossible, and that you can certainly get a farm if you will
go to work in a Certain Way.

At different periods the tide of opportunity sets in different
directions, according to the needs of the Whole, and the particular
stage of social evolution which has been reached. At present, in
America, it is setting toward agriculture and the allied industries
and professions. To-day, opportunity is open before the farmer in his
line more than before the factory worker in his line. It is open before
the business man who supplies the farmer more than before the one who
supplies the factory worker; and before the professional man who waits
upon the farmer more than before the one who serves the working class.

There is abundance of opportunity for the man who will go with the
tide, instead of trying to swim against it.

So the factory workers, either as individuals or as a class, are not
deprived of opportunity. The workers are not being “kept down” by their
masters; they are not being “ground” by the trusts and combinations
of capital. As a class, they are where they are because they do not
do things in a Certain Way. If the workers of America chose to do so,
they could follow the example of their brothers in Belgium and other
countries, and establish great department stores and co-operative
industries; they could elect men of their own class to office, and pass
laws favoring the development of such co-operative industries; and in a
few years they could take peaceable possession of the industrial field.

The working class may become the master class whenever they will
begin to do things in a Certain Way; the law of wealth is the same
for them as it is for all others. This they must learn; and they will
remain where they are as long as they continue to do as they do. The
individual worker, however, is not held down by the ignorance or the
mental slothfulness of his class; he can follow the tide of opportunity
to riches, and this book will tell him how.

No one is kept in poverty by a shortness in the supply of riches;
there is more than enough for all. A palace as large as the capitol at
Washington might be built for every family on earth from the building
material in the United States alone; and under intensive cultivation,
this country would produce wool, cotton, linen, and silk enough to
clothe each person in the world finer than Solomon was arrayed in all
his glory; together with food enough to feed them all luxuriously. The
visible supply is practically inexhaustible; and the invisible supply
really IS inexhaustible.

_Everything you see on earth is made from one original substance, out
of which all things proceed._

New forms are constantly being made, and older ones are dissolving; but
all are shapes assumed by One Thing.

There is no limit to the supply of Formless Stuff, or Original
Substance. The universe is made out of it; but it was not all used
in making the universe. The spaces in, through, and between the forms
of the visible universe are permeated and filled with the Original
Substance; with the Formless Stuff; with the raw material of all
things. Ten thousand times as much as has been made might still
be made, and even then we should not have exhausted the supply of
universal raw material.

No man, therefore, is poor because nature is poor, or because there is
not enough to go around.

Nature is an inexhaustible storehouse of riches; the supply will never
run short. Original Substance is alive with creative energy, and is
constantly producing more forms. When the supply of building material
is exhausted, more will be produced; when the soil is exhausted so that
foodstuffs and materials for clothing will no longer grow upon it, it
will be renewed or more soil will be made. When all the gold and silver
has been dug from the earth, if man is still in such a stage of social
development that he needs gold and silver, more will be produced from
the Formless. The Formless Stuff responds to the needs of man; it will
not let him be without any good thing.

This is true of man collectively; the race as a whole is always
abundantly rich, and if individuals are poor, it is because they do not
follow the Certain Way of doing things which makes the individual man
rich.

The Formless Stuff is intelligent; it is stuff which thinks. It is
alive, and is always impelled toward more life.

It is the natural and inherent impulse of life to seek to live more; it
is the nature of intelligence to enlarge itself, and of consciousness
to seek to extend its boundaries and find fuller expression. The
universe of forms has been made by Formless Living Substance, throwing
itself into form in order to express itself more fully.

The universe is a great Living Presence, always moving inherently
toward more life and fuller functioning.

Nature is formed for the advancement of life; its impelling motive is
the increase of life. For this cause, everything which can possibly
minister to life is bountifully provided; there can be no lack unless
God is to contradict himself and nullify his own works.

You are not kept poor by lack in the supply of riches; it is a fact
which I shall demonstrate a little farther on that even the resources
of the Formless Supply are at the command of the man or woman who will
act and think in a Certain Way.




CHAPTER IV. THE FIRST PRINCIPLE IN THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


Thought is the only power which can produce tangible riches from
the Formless Substance. The stuff from which all things are made is
a substance which thinks, and a thought of form in this substance
produces the form.

Original Substance moves according to its thoughts; every form and
process you see in nature is the visible expression of a thought in
Original Substance. As the Formless Stuff thinks of a form, it takes
that form; as it thinks of a motion, it makes that motion. That is the
way all things were created. We live in a thought world, which is part
of a thought universe.

The thought of a moving universe extended throughout Formless
Substance, and the Thinking Stuff moving according to that thought,
took the form of systems of planets, and maintains that form. Thinking
Substance takes the form of its thought, and moves according to the
thought. Holding the idea of a circling system of suns and worlds, it
takes the form of these bodies, and moves them as it thinks. Thinking
the form of a slow-growing oak tree, it moves accordingly, and produces
the tree, though centuries may be required to do the work. In creating,
the Formless seems to move according to the lines of motion it has
established; the thought of an oak tree does not cause the instant
formation of a full-grown tree, but it does start in motion the forces
which will produce the tree, along established lines of growth.

Every thought of form, held in thinking Substance, causes the creation
of the form, but always, or at least generally, along lines of growth
and action already established.

The thought of a house of a certain construction, if it were impressed
upon Formless Substance, might not cause the instant formation of the
house; but it would cause the turning of creative energies already
working in trade and commerce into such channels as to result in the
speedy building of the house. And if there were no existing channels
through which the creative energy could work, then the house would be
formed directly from primal substance, without waiting for the slow
processes of the organic and inorganic world.

_No thought of form can be impressed upon Original Substance without
causing the creation of the form._

Man is a thinking center, and can originate thought. All the forms that
man fashions with his hands must first exist in his thought; he cannot
shape a thing until he has thought that thing.

And so far man has confined his efforts wholly to the work of his
hands; he has applied manual labor to the world of forms, seeking to
change or modify those already existing. He has never thought of trying
to cause the creation of new forms by impressing his thoughts upon
Formless Substance.

When man has a thought-form, he takes material from the forms of
nature, and makes an image of the form which is in his mind. He has, so
far, made little or no effort to co-operate with Formless Intelligence;
to work “with the Father.” He has not dreamed that he can “do what he
seeth the Father doing.” Man re-shapes and modifies existing forms by
manual labor; he has given no attention to the question whether he
may not produce things from Formless Substance by communicating his
thoughts to it. We propose to prove that he may do so; to prove that
any man or woman may do so, and to show how. As our first step, we
must lay down three fundamental propositions.

First, we assert that there is one original formless stuff, or
substance, from which all things are made. All the seemingly many
elements are but different presentations of one element; all the
many forms found in organic and inorganic nature are but different
shapes, made from the same stuff. And this stuff is thinking stuff;
a thought held in it produces the form of the thought. Thought, in
thinking substance, produces shapes. Man is a thinking center, capable
of original thought; if man can communicate his thought to original
thinking substance, he can cause the creation, or formation, of the
thing he thinks about. To summarize this:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by
the thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

It may be asked if I can prove these statements; and without going into
details, I answer that I can do so, both by logic and experience.

Reasoning back from the phenomena of form and thought, I come to one
original thinking substance; and reasoning forward from this thinking
substance, I come to man’s power to cause the formation of the thing he
thinks about.

And by experiment, I find the reasoning true; and this is my strongest
proof.

If one man who reads this book gets rich by doing what it tells him to
do, that is evidence in support of my claim; but if every man who does
what it tells him to do gets rich, that is positive proof until some
one goes through the process and fails. The theory is true until the
process fails; and this process will not fail, for every man who does
exactly what this book tells him to do will get rich.

I have said that men get rich by doing things in a Certain Way; and in
order to do so, men must become able to think in a certain way.

_A man’s way of doing things is the direct result of the way he thinks
about things._

To do things in the way you want to do them, you will have to acquire
the ability to think the way you want to think; this is the first step
toward getting rich.

_To think what you want to think is to think TRUTH, regardless of
appearances._

Every man has the natural and inherent power to think what he wants to
think, but it requires far more effort to do so than it does to think
the thoughts which are suggested by appearances. To think according
to appearances is easy; to think truth regardless of appearances is
laborious, and requires the expenditure of more power than any other
work man is called upon to perform.

There is no labor from which most people shrink as they do from that
of sustained and consecutive thought; it is the hardest work in the
world. This is especially true when truth is contrary to appearances.
Every appearance in the visible world tends to produce a corresponding
form in the mind which observes it; and this can only be prevented by
holding the thought of the TRUTH.

To look upon the appearance of disease will produce the form of disease
in your own mind, and ultimately in your body, unless you hold the
thought of the truth, which is that there is no disease; it is only an
appearance, and the reality is health.

To look upon the appearances of poverty will produce corresponding
forms in your own mind, unless you hold to the truth that there is no
poverty; there is only abundance.

To think health when surrounded by the appearances of disease, or to
think riches when in the midst of appearances of poverty, requires
power; but he who acquires this power becomes a MASTER MIND. He can
conquer fate; he can have what he wants.

This power can only be acquired by getting hold of the basic fact which
is behind all appearances; and that fact is that there is one Thinking
Substance, from which and by which all things are made.

Then we must grasp the truth that every thought held in this substance
becomes a form, and that man can so impress his thoughts upon It as to
cause them to take form and become visible things.

When we realize this, we lose all doubt and fear, for we know that we
can create what we want to create; we can get what we want to have, and
can become what we want to be. As a first step toward getting rich, you
must believe the three fundamental statements given previously in this
chapter; and in order to emphasize them, I repeat them here:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

You must lay aside all other concepts of the universe than this
monistic one; and you must dwell upon this until it is fixed in
your mind, and has become your habitual thought. Read these creed
statements over and over again; fix every word upon your memory, and
meditate upon them until you firmly believe what they say. If a doubt
comes to you, cast it aside as a sin. Do not listen to arguments
against this idea; do not go to churches or lectures where a contrary
concept of things is taught or preached. Do not read magazines or books
which teach a different idea; if you get mixed up in your faith, all
your efforts will be in vain.

Do not ask why these things are true, nor speculate as to how they can
be true; simply take them on trust.

The science of getting rich begins with the absolute acceptance of this
faith.




CHAPTER V. INCREASING LIFE.


You must get rid of the last vestige of the old idea that there is a
Deity whose will it is that you should be poor, or whose purposes may
be served by keeping you in poverty.

The Intelligent Substance which is All, and in all, and which lives
in All and lives in you, is a consciously Living Substance. Being a
consciously living substance, It must have the natural and inherent
desire of every living intelligence for increase of life. Every living
thing must continually seek for the enlargement of its life, because
life, in the mere act of living, must increase itself.

A seed, dropped into the ground, springs into activity, and in the act
of living produces a hundred more seeds; life, by living, multiplies
itself. It is forever Becoming More; it must do so, if it continues to
be at all.

Intelligence is under this same necessity for continuous increase.
Every thought we think makes it necessary for us to think another
thought; consciousness is continually expanding. Every fact we learn
leads us to the learning of another fact; knowledge is continually
increasing. Every talent we cultivate brings to the mind the desire to
cultivate another talent; we are subject to the urge of life, seeking
expression, which ever drives us on to know more, to do more, and to be
more.

In order to know more, do more, and be more we must have more; we must
have things to use, for we learn, and do, and become, only by using
things. We must get rich, so that we can live more.

The desire for riches is simply the capacity for larger life seeking
fulfillment; every desire is the effort of an unexpressed possibility
to come into action. It is power seeking to manifest which causes
desire. That which makes you want more money is the same as that which
makes the plant grow; it is Life, seeking fuller expression.

The One Living Substance must be subject to this inherent law of all
life; it is permeated with the desire to live more; that is why it is
under the necessity of creating things.

The One Substance desires to live more in you; hence it wants you to
have all the things you can use.

It is the desire of God that you should get rich. He wants you to get
rich because he can express himself better through you if you have
plenty of things to use in giving him expression. He can live more in
you if you have unlimited command of the means of life.

The universe desires you to have everything you want to have.

Nature is friendly to your plans.

Everything is naturally for you.

Make up your mind that this is true.

It is essential, however, that _your purpose should harmonize with the
purpose that is in All_.

You must want real life, not mere pleasure or sensual gratification.
Life is the performance of function; and the individual really lives
only when he performs every function, physical, mental, and spiritual,
of which he is capable, without excess in any.

You do not want to get rich in order to live swinishly, for the
gratification of animal desires; that is not life. But the performance
of every physical function is a part of life, and no one lives
completely who denies the impulses of the body a normal and healthful
expression.

You do not want to get rich solely to enjoy mental pleasures, to get
knowledge, to gratify ambition, to outshine others, to be famous. All
these are a legitimate part of life, but the man who lives for the
pleasures of the intellect alone will only have a partial life, and he
will never be satisfied with his lot.

You do not want to get rich solely for the good of others, to lose
yourself for the salvation of mankind, to experience the joys of
philanthropy and sacrifice. The joys of the soul are only a part of
life; and they are no better or nobler than any other part.

You want to get rich in order that you may eat, drink, and be merry
when it is time to do these things; in order that you may surround
yourself with beautiful things, see distant lands, feed your mind, and
develop your intellect; in order that you may love men and do kind
things, and be able to play a good part in helping the world to find
truth.

But remember that extreme altruism is no better and no nobler than
extreme selfishness; both are mistakes.

Get rid of the idea that God wants you to sacrifice yourself for
others, and that you can secure his favor by doing so; God requires
nothing of the kind.

What he wants is that you should make the most of yourself, for
yourself, and for others; and _you can help others more by making the
most of yourself than in any other way_.

You can make the most of yourself only by getting rich; so it is right
and praiseworthy that you should give your first and best thought to
the work of acquiring wealth.

Remember, however, that the desire of Substance is for all, and its
movements must be for more life to all; it cannot be made to work for
less life to any, because it is equally in all, seeking riches and life.

Intelligent Substance will make things for you, but it will not take
things away from some one else and give them to you.

You must get rid of the thought of competition. You are to create, not
to compete for what is already created.

You do not have to take anything away from any one.

You do not have to drive sharp bargains.

You do not have to cheat, or to take advantage. You do not need to let
any man work for you for less than he earns.

You do not have to covet the property of others, or to look at it with
wishful eyes; no man has anything of which you cannot have the like,
and that without taking what he has away from him.

You are to become a creator, not a competitor; you are going to get
what you want, but in such a way that when you get it every other man
will have more than he has now.

I am aware that there are men who get a vast amount of money by
proceeding in direct opposition to the statements in the paragraph
above, and may add a word of explanation here. Men of the plutocratic
type, who become very rich, do so sometimes purely by their
extraordinary ability on the plane of competition; and sometimes
they unconsciously relate themselves to Substance in its great
purposes and movements for the general racial upbuilding through
industrial evolution. Rockefeller, Carnegie, Morgan, _et al._, have
been the unconscious agents of the Supreme in the necessary work of
systematizing and organizing productive industry; and in the end, their
work will contribute immensely toward increased life for all. Their
day is nearly over; they have organized production, and _will soon
be succeeded by the agents of the multitude, who will organize the
machinery of distribution_.

The multi-millionaires are like the monster reptiles of the prehistoric
eras; they play a necessary part in the evolutionary process, but the
same Power which produced them will dispose of them. And it is well to
bear in mind that they have never been really rich; a record of the
private lives of most of this class will show that they have really
been the most abject and wretched of the poor.

Riches secured on the competitive plane are never satisfactory and
permanent; they are yours to-day, and another’s to-morrow. Remember, if
you are to become rich in a scientific and certain way, you must rise
entirely out of the competitive thought. You must never think for a
moment that the supply is limited. Just as soon as you begin to think
that all the money is being “cornered” and controlled by bankers and
others, and that you must exert yourself to get laws passed to stop
this process, and so on; in that moment you drop into the competitive
mind, and your power to cause creation is gone for the time being; and
what is worse, you will probably arrest the creative movements you have
already instituted.

KNOW that there are countless millions of dollars’ worth of gold in the
mountains of the earth, not yet brought to light; and know that if
there were not, more would be created from Thinking Substance to supply
your needs.

KNOW that the money you need will come, even if it is necessary for a
thousand men to be led to the discovery of new gold mines to-morrow.

_Never look at the visible supply; look always at the limitless riches
in Formless Substance, and KNOW that they are coming to you as fast as
you can receive and use them._ Nobody, by cornering the visible supply,
can prevent you from getting what is yours.

So never allow yourself to think for an instant that all the best
building spots will be taken before you get ready to build your house,
unless you hurry. Never worry about the trusts and combines, and get
anxious for fear they will soon come to own the whole earth. Never
get afraid that you will lose what you want because some other person
“beats you to it.” That cannot possibly happen; you are not seeking
anything that is possessed by anybody else; you are causing what you
want to be created from Formless Substance, and the supply is without
limits. Stick to the formulated statement:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._




CHAPTER VI. HOW RICHES COME TO YOU.


When I say that you do not have to drive sharp bargains, I do not mean
that you do not have to drive any bargains at all, or that you are
above the necessity for having any dealings with your fellow men. I
mean that you will not need to deal with them unfairly; you do not have
to get something for nothing, _but can give to every man more than you
take from him_.

You cannot give every man more in cash market value than you take
from him, but you can give him more in use value than the cash value
of the thing you take from him. The paper, ink, and other material in
this book may not be worth the money you paid for it; but if the ideas
suggested by it bring you thousands of dollars, you have not been
wronged by those who sold it to you; they have given you a great use
value for a small cash value.

Let us suppose that I own a picture by one of the great artists, which,
in any civilized community, is worth thousands of dollars. I take it to
Baffin Bay, and by “salesmanship” induce an Eskimo to give a bundle of
furs worth $500 for it. I have really wronged him, for he has no use
for the picture; it has no use value to him; it will not add to his
life.

But suppose I give him a gun worth $50 for his furs; then he has made
a good bargain. He has use for the gun; it will get him many more furs
and much food; it will add to his life in every way; it will make him
rich.

When you rise from the competitive to the creative plane, you can scan
your business transactions very strictly, and if you are selling any
man anything which does not add more to his life than the thing he
gives you in exchange, you can afford to stop it. You do not have to
beat anybody in business. And if you are in a business which does beat
people, get out of it at once.

Give every man more in use value than you take from him in cash
value; then you are adding to the life of the world by every business
transaction.

If you have people working for you, you must take from them more in
cash value than you pay them in wages; but _you can so organize your
business that it will be filled with the principle of advancement_, and
so that each employee who wishes to do so may advance a little every
day.

You can make your business do for your employees what this book is
doing for you. You can so conduct your business that it will be a sort
of ladder, by which every employee who will take the trouble may climb
to riches himself; and given the opportunity, if he will not do so it
is not your fault.

And finally, because you are to cause the creation of your riches from
Formless Substance which permeates all your environment, it does not
follow that they are to take shape from the atmosphere and come into
being before your eyes.

If you want a sewing machine, for instance, I do not mean to tell you
that you are to impress the thought of a sewing machine on Thinking
Substance until the machine is formed without hands, in the room where
you sit, or elsewhere. But if you want a sewing machine, hold the
mental image of it with the most positive certainty that it is being
made, or is on its way to you. After once forming the thought, have
the most absolute and unquestioning faith that the sewing machine is
coming; never think of it, or speak of it, in any other way than as
being sure to arrive. Claim it as already yours.

It will be brought to you by the power of the Supreme Intelligence,
acting upon the minds of men. If you live in Maine, it may be that a
man will be brought from Texas or Japan to engage in some transaction
which will result in your getting what you want.

If so, the whole matter will be as much to that man’s advantage as it
is to yours.

Do not forget for a moment that the Thinking Substance is through all,
in all, communicating with all, and can influence all. The desire of
Thinking Substance for fuller life and better living has caused the
creation of all the sewing machines already made; and it can cause the
creation of millions more, and will, whenever men set it in motion by
desire and faith, and by acting in a Certain Way.

You can certainly have a sewing machine in your house; and it is just
as certain that you can have any other thing or things which you want,
and which you will use for the advancement of your own life and the
lives of others.

You need not hesitate about asking largely; “it is your Father’s
pleasure to give you the kingdom,” said Jesus.

Original Substance wants to live all that is possible in you, and wants
you to have all that you can or will use for the living of the most
abundant life.

If you fix upon your consciousness the fact that the desire you feel
for the possession of riches is one with the desire of Omnipotence for
more complete expression, your faith becomes invincible.

Once I saw a little boy sitting at a piano, and vainly trying to bring
harmony out of the keys; and I saw that he was grieved and provoked
by his inability to play real music. I asked him the cause of his
vexation, and he answered, “I can feel the music in me, but I can’t
make my hands go right.” The music in him was the URGE of Original
Substance, containing all the possibilities of all life; all that there
is of music was seeking expression through the child.

God, the One Substance, is trying to live and do and enjoy things
through humanity. He is saying, “I want hands to build wonderful
structures, to play divine harmonies, to paint glorious pictures; I
want feet to run my errands, eyes to see my beauties, tongues to tell
mighty truths and to sing marvelous songs,” and so on.

All that there is of possibility is seeking expression through men.
God wants those who can play music to have pianos and every other
instrument, and to have the means to cultivate their talents to the
fullest extent; He wants those who can appreciate beauty to be able
to surround themselves with beautiful things; He wants those who can
discern truth to have every opportunity to travel and observe; He wants
those who can appreciate dress to be beautifully clothed, and those who
can appreciate good food to be luxuriously fed.

He wants all these things because it is Himself that enjoys and
appreciates them; it is God who wants to play, and sing, and enjoy
beauty, and proclaim truth, and wear fine clothes, and eat good foods.

“It is God that worketh in you to will and to do,” said Paul.

The desire you feel for riches is the Infinite, seeking to express
Himself in you as He sought to find expression in the little boy at the
piano.

So you need not hesitate to ask largely.

Your part is to focalize and express the desires of God.

This is a difficult point with most people; they retain something of
the old idea that poverty and self-sacrifice are pleasing to God. They
look upon poverty as a part of the plan, a necessity of nature. They
have the idea that God has finished His work, and made all that He
can make, and that the majority of men must stay poor because there
is not enough to go around. They hold to so much of this erroneous
thought that they feel ashamed to ask for wealth; they try not to want
more than a very modest competence, just enough to make them fairly
comfortable.

I recall now the case of one student who was told that he must get in
mind a clear picture of the things he desired, so that the creative
thought of them might be impressed on Formless Substance. He was a very
poor man, living in a rented house, and having only what he earned
from day to day; and he could not grasp the fact that all wealth was
his. So, after thinking the matter over, he decided that he might
reasonably ask for a new rug for the floor of his best room, and an
anthracite coal stove to heat the house during the cold weather.
Following the instructions given in this book, he obtained these things
in a few months; and then it dawned upon him that he had not asked
enough. He went through the house in which he lived, and planned all
the improvements he would like to make in it; he mentally added a bay
window here and a room there, until it was complete in his mind as his
ideal home; and then he planned its furnishings.

Holding the whole picture in his mind, he began living in the Certain
Way, and moving toward what he wanted; and he owns the house now, and
is rebuilding it after the form of his mental image. And now, with
still larger faith, he is going on to get greater things. It has been
unto him according to his faith, and it is so with you and with all of
us.




CHAPTER VII. GRATITUDE.


The illustrations given in the last chapter will have conveyed to the
reader the fact that the first step toward getting rich is to convey
the idea of your wants to the Formless Substance.

This is true, and you will see that in order to do so it becomes
necessary to relate yourself to the Formless Intelligence in a
harmonious way.

To secure this harmonious relation is a matter of such primary and
vital importance that I shall give some space to its discussion here,
and give you instructions which, if you will follow them, will be
certain to bring you into perfect unity of mind with God.

The whole process of mental adjustment and atonement can be summed up
in one word, _gratitude_.

First, you believe that there is one Intelligent Substance, from which
all things proceed; second, you believe that this Substance gives
you everything you desire; and third, you relate yourself to It by a
feeling of deep and profound gratitude.

Many people who order their lives rightly in all other ways are kept
in poverty by their lack of gratitude. Having received one gift from
God, they cut the wires which connect them with Him by failing to make
acknowledgment.

It is easy to understand that the nearer we live to the source of
wealth, the more wealth we shall receive; and it is easy also to
understand that the soul that is always grateful lives in closer
touch with God than the one which never looks to Him in thankful
acknowledgment.

The more gratefully we fix our minds on the Supreme when good things
come to us, the more good things we will receive, and the more rapidly
they will come; and the reason simply is that the mental attitude of
gratitude draws the mind into closer touch with the source from which
the blessings come.

If it is a new thought to you that gratitude brings your whole mind
into closer harmony with the creative energies of the universe,
consider it well, and you will see that it is true. The good things you
already have have come to you along the line of obedience to certain
laws. Gratitude will lead your mind out along the ways by which things
come; and it will keep you in close harmony with creative thought and
prevent you from falling into competitive thought.

Gratitude alone can keep you looking toward the All, and prevent you
from falling into the error of thinking of the supply as limited; and
to do that would be fatal to your hopes.

There is a Law of Gratitude, and it is absolutely necessary that you
should observe the law, if you are to get the results you seek.

The law of gratitude is the natural principle that action and reaction
are always equal, and in opposite directions.

The grateful outreaching of your mind in thankful praise to the Supreme
_is a liberation or expenditure of force; it cannot fail to reach that
to which it is addressed, and the reaction is an instantaneous movement
toward you_.

“Draw nigh unto God, and He will draw nigh unto you.” That is a
statement of psychological truth.

And if your gratitude is strong and constant, the reaction in Formless
Substance will be strong and continuous; the movement of the things you
want will be always toward you. Notice the grateful attitude that Jesus
took; how He always seems to be saying, “I thank Thee, Father, that
Thou hearest me.” You cannot exercise much power without gratitude;
for it is gratitude that keeps you connected with Power.

But the value of gratitude does not consist solely in getting you more
blessings in the future. Without gratitude you cannot long keep from
dissatisfied thought regarding things as they are.

The moment you permit your mind to dwell with dissatisfaction upon
things as they are, you begin to lose ground. You fix attention upon
the common, the ordinary, the poor, and the squalid and mean; and your
mind takes the form of these things. Then you will transmit these
forms or mental images to the Formless, and the common, the poor, the
squalid, and mean will come to you.

To permit your mind to dwell upon the inferior is to become inferior
and to surround yourself with inferior things.

On the other hand, to fix your attention on the best is to surround
yourself with the best, and to become the best.

The Creative Power within us makes us into the image of that to which
we give our attention.

We are Thinking Substance, and thinking substance always takes the form
of that which it thinks about.

The grateful mind is constantly fixed upon the best; therefore it tends
to become the best; it takes the form or character of the best, and
will receive the best.

Also, faith is born of gratitude. The grateful mind continually expects
good things, and expectation becomes faith. The reaction of gratitude
upon one’s own mind produces faith; and every outgoing wave of grateful
thanksgiving increases faith. He who has no feeling of gratitude cannot
long retain a living faith; and without a living faith you cannot get
rich by the creative method, as we shall see in the following chapters.

It is necessary, then, to cultivate the habit of being grateful for
every good thing that comes to you; and to give thanks continuously.

And because all things have contributed to your advancement, you should
include all things in your gratitude.

Do not waste time thinking or talking about the shortcomings or wrong
actions of plutocrats or trust magnates. Their organization of the
world has made your opportunity; all you get really comes to you
because of them.

Do not rage against corrupt politicians; if it were not for politicians
we should fall into anarchy, and your opportunity would be greatly
lessened.

God has worked a long time and very patiently to bring us up to where
we are in industry and government, and He is going right on with
His work. There is not the least doubt that He will do away with
plutocrats, trust magnates, captains of industry, and politicians as
soon as they can be spared; but in the meantime, behold they are all
very good. Remember that they are all helping to arrange the lines of
transmission along which your riches will come to you, and be grateful
to them all. This will bring you into harmonious relations with the
good in everything, and the good in everything will move toward you.




CHAPTER VIII. THINKING IN THE CERTAIN WAY.


Turn back to chapter VI., and read again the story of the man who
formed a mental image of his house, and you will get a fair idea of the
initial step toward getting rich. You must form a clear and definite
mental picture of what you want; you cannot transmit an idea unless you
have it yourself.

You must have it before you can give it; and many people fail to
impress Thinking Substance because they have themselves only a vague
and misty concept of the things they want to do, to have, or to become.

It is not enough that you should have a general desire for wealth “to
do good with”; everybody has that desire.

It is not enough that you should have a wish to travel, see things,
live more, etc. Everybody has those desires also. If you were going to
send a wireless message to a friend, you would not send the letters
of the alphabet in their order, and let him construct the message for
himself; nor would you take words at random from the dictionary. You
would send a coherent sentence; one which meant something. When you try
to impress your wants upon Substance, remember that it must be done by
a coherent statement; you must know what you want, and be definite.

You can never get rich, or start the creative power into action, by
sending out unformed longings and vague desires.

Go over your desires just as the man I have described went over his
house; see just what you want, and get a clear mental picture of it as
you wish it to look when you get it.

That clear mental picture you must have continually in mind, as the
sailor has in mind the port toward which he is sailing the ship; you
must keep your face toward it all the time. You must no more lose sight
of it than the steersman loses sight of the compass.

It is not necessary to take exercises in concentration, nor to set
apart special times for prayer and affirmation, nor to “go into the
silence,” nor to do occult stunts of any kind. These things are well
enough, but all you need is to know what you want, and to want it badly
enough so that it will stay in your thoughts.

Spend as much of your leisure time as you can in contemplating your
picture, but no one needs to take exercises to concentrate his mind on
a thing which he really wants; it is the things you do not really care
about which require effort to fix your attention upon them.

And unless you really want to get rich, so that the desire is strong
enough to hold your thoughts directed to the purpose as the magnetic
pole holds the needle of the compass, it will hardly be worth while for
you to try to carry out the instructions given in this book.

The methods herein set forth are for people whose desire for riches is
strong enough to overcome mental laziness and the love of ease, and
make them work.

The more clear and definite you make your picture, then, and the
more you dwell upon it, bringing out all its delightful details, the
stronger your desire will be; and the stronger your desire, the easier
it will be to hold your mind fixed upon the picture of what you want.

Something more is necessary, however, than merely to see the picture
clearly. If that is all you do, you are only a dreamer, and will have
little or no power for accomplishment.

Behind your clear vision must be the purpose to realize it; to bring it
out in tangible expression.

And behind this purpose must be an invincible and unwavering FAITH
that the thing is already yours; that it is “at hand” and you have only
to take possession of it.

Live in the new house, mentally, until it takes form around you
physically. In the mental realm, enter at once into full enjoyment of
the things you want.

“Whatsoever things ye ask for when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them,” said Jesus.

See the things you want as if they were actually around you all the
time; see yourself as owning and using them. Make use of them in
imagination just as you will use them when they are your tangible
possessions. Dwell upon your mental picture until it is clear and
distinct, and then take the Mental Attitude of Ownership toward
everything in that picture. Take possession of it, in mind, in the full
faith that it is actually yours. Hold to this mental ownership; do not
waver for an instant in the faith that it is real.

And remember what was said in a preceding chapter about gratitude; be
as thankful for it all the time as you expect to be when it has taken
form. The man who can sincerely thank God for the things which as yet
he owns only in imagination, has real faith. He will get rich; he will
cause the creation of whatsoever he wants.

You do not need to pray repeatedly for the things you want; it is not
necessary to tell God about it every day.

“Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do,” said Jesus to His pupils,
“for your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things before ye
ask Him.”

Your part is to intelligently formulate your desire for the things
which make for a larger life, and to get these desires arranged into a
coherent whole; and then to impress this Whole Desire upon the Formless
Substance, which has the power and the will to bring you what you want.

You do not make this impression by repeating strings of words; you make
it by holding the vision with unshakable PURPOSE to attain it, and with
steadfast FAITH that you do attain it.

The answer to prayer is not according to your faith while you are
talking, but according to your faith while you are working.

You cannot impress the mind of God by having a special Sabbath day set
apart to tell Him what you want, and then forgetting Him during the
rest of the week. You cannot impress Him by having special hours to go
into your closet and pray, if you then dismiss the matter from your
mind until the hour of prayer comes again.

Oral prayer is well enough, and has its effect, especially upon
yourself, in clarifying your vision and strengthening your faith; but
it is not your oral petitions which get you what you want. In order to
get rich you do not need a “sweet hour of prayer”; you need to “pray
without ceasing.” And by prayer I mean holding steadily to your vision,
with the purpose to cause its creation into solid form, and the faith
that you are doing so.

“Believe that ye _receive_ them.”

The whole matter turns on receiving, once you have clearly formed
your vision. When you _have_ formed it, it is well to make an oral
statement, addressing the Supreme in reverent prayer; and from that
moment you must, in mind, receive what you ask for. Live in the new
house; wear the fine clothes; ride in the automobile; go on the
journey, and confidently plan for greater journeys. Think and speak of
all the things you have asked for in terms of actual present ownership.
Imagine an environment, and a financial condition exactly as you want
them, and live all the time in that imaginary environment and financial
condition. Mind, however, that you do not do this as a mere dreamer
and castle builder; hold to the FAITH that the imaginary is being
realized, and to the PURPOSE to realize it. Remember that it is faith
and purpose in the use of the imagination which make the difference
between the scientist and the dreamer. And having learned this fact, it
is here that you must learn the proper use of the Will.




CHAPTER IX. HOW TO USE THE WILL.


To set about getting rich in a scientific way, you do not try to apply
your will power to anything outside of yourself.

You have no right to do so, anyway.

It is wrong to apply your will to other men and women, in order to get
them to do what you wish done.

It is as flagrantly wrong to coerce people by mental power as it is to
coerce them by physical power. If compelling people by physical force
to do things for you reduces them to slavery, compelling them by mental
means accomplishes exactly the same thing; the only difference is in
methods. If taking things from people by physical force is robbery,
then taking things by mental force is robbery also; there is no
difference in principle.

You have no right to use your will power upon another person, even “for
his own good”; for you do not know what is for his good.

The science of getting rich does not require you to apply power or
force to any other person, in any way whatsoever. There is not the
slightest necessity for doing so; indeed, any attempt to use your will
upon others will only tend to defeat your purpose.

You do not need to apply your will to things, in order to compel them
to come to you.

That would simply be trying to coerce God, and would be foolish and
useless, as well as irreverent.

You do not have to compel God to give you good things, any more than
you have to use your will power to make the sun rise.

You do not have to use your will power to conquer an unfriendly deity,
or to make stubborn and rebellious forces do your bidding.

Substance is friendly to you, and is more anxious to give you what you
want than you are to get it.

To get rich, you need only to use your will power upon yourself.

When you know what to think and do, then you must use your will
to compel yourself to think and do the right things. That is the
legitimate use of the will in getting what you want--to use it in
holding yourself to the right course. Use your will to keep yourself
thinking and acting in the Certain Way.

Do not try to project your will, or your thoughts, or your mind out
into space, to “act” on things or people.

Keep your mind at home; it can accomplish more there than elsewhere.

Use your mind to form a mental image of what you want, and to hold that
vision with faith and purpose; and use your will to keep your mind
working in the Right Way.

The more steady and continuous your faith and purpose, the more rapidly
you will get rich, because you will make only POSITIVE impressions
upon Substance; and you will not neutralize or offset them by negative
impressions.

The picture of your desires, held with faith and purpose, is taken up
by the Formless, and permeates it to great distances,--throughout the
universe, for all I know.

As this impression spreads, all things are set moving toward its
realization; every living thing, every inanimate thing, and the
things yet uncreated, are stirred toward bringing into being that
which you want. All force begins to be exerted in that direction; all
things begin to move toward you. The minds of people, everywhere, are
influenced toward doing the things necessary to the fulfilling of your
desires; and they work for you, unconsciously.

But you can check all this by starting a negative impression in the
Formless Substance. Doubt or unbelief is as certain to start a
movement away from you as faith and purpose are to start one toward
you. It is by not understanding this that most people who try to make
use of “mental science” in getting rich make their failure. Every hour
and moment you spend in giving heed to doubts and fears, every hour you
spend in worry, every hour in which your soul is possessed by unbelief,
sets a current away from you in the whole domain of intelligent
Substance. All the promises are unto them that believe, and unto them
only. Notice how insistent Jesus was upon this point of belief; and now
you know the reason why.

Since belief is all important, it behooves you to guard your thoughts;
and as your beliefs will be shaped to a very great extent by the things
you observe and think about, it is important that you should command
your attention.

And here the will comes into use; for it is by your will that you
determine upon what things your attention shall be fixed.

If you want to become rich, you must not make a study of poverty.

Things are not brought into being by thinking about their opposites.
Health is never to be attained by studying disease and thinking about
disease; righteousness is not to be promoted by studying sin and
thinking about sin; and no one ever got rich by studying poverty and
thinking about poverty.

Medicine as a science of disease has increased disease; religion as a
science of sin has promoted sin, and economics as a study of poverty
will fill the world with wretchedness and want.

Do not talk about poverty; do not investigate it, or concern yourself
with it. Never mind what its causes are; you have nothing to do with
them.

What concerns you is the cure.

Do not spend your time in charitable work, or charity movements; all
charity only tends to perpetuate the wretchedness it aims to eradicate.

I do not say that you should be hard-hearted or unkind, and refuse to
hear the cry of need; but you must not try to eradicate poverty in any
of the conventional ways. Put poverty behind you, and put all that
pertains to it behind you, and “make good.”

Get rich; that is the best way you can help the poor.

And you cannot hold the mental image which is to make you rich if you
fill your mind with pictures of poverty. Do not read books or papers
which give circumstantial accounts of the wretchedness of the tenement
dwellers, of the horrors of child labor, and so on. Do not read
anything which fills your mind with gloomy images of want and suffering.

You cannot help the poor in the least by knowing about these things;
and the wide-spread knowledge of them does not tend at all to do away
with poverty.

What tends to do away with poverty is not the getting of pictures of
poverty into your mind, but getting pictures of wealth into the minds
of the poor.

You are not deserting the poor in their misery when you refuse to allow
your mind to be filled with pictures of that misery.

Poverty can be done away with, not by increasing the number of
well-to-do people who think about poverty, but by increasing the number
of poor people who propose with faith to get rich.

The poor do not need charity; they need inspiration. Charity only sends
them a loaf of bread to keep them alive in their wretchedness, or gives
them an entertainment to make them forget for an hour or two; but
inspiration will cause them to rise out of their misery. If you want to
help the poor, demonstrate to them that they can become rich; prove it
by getting rich yourself.

The only way in which poverty will ever be banished from this world
is by getting a large and constantly increasing number of people to
practice the teachings of this book.

People must be taught to become rich by creation, not by competition.

Every man who becomes rich by competition throws down behind him the
ladder by which he rises, and keeps others down; but every man who gets
rich by creation opens a way for thousands to follow him, and inspires
them to do so.

You are not showing hardness of heart or an unfeeling disposition when
you refuse to pity poverty, see poverty, read about poverty, or think
or talk about it, or to listen to those who do talk about it. Use your
will power to keep your mind OFF the subject of poverty, and to keep it
fixed with faith and purpose ON the vision of what you want.




CHAPTER X. FURTHER USE OF THE WILL.


You cannot retain a true and clear vision of wealth if you are
constantly turning your attention to opposing pictures, whether they be
external or imaginary.

Do not tell of your past troubles of a financial nature, if you have
had them; do not think of them at all. Do not tell of the poverty of
your parents, or the hardships of your early life; to do any of these
things is to mentally class yourself with the poor for the time being,
and it will certainly check the movement of things in your direction.

“Let the dead bury their dead,” as Jesus said.

Put poverty and all things that pertain to poverty completely behind
you.

You have accepted a certain theory of the universe as being correct,
and are resting all your hopes of happiness on its being correct; and
what can you gain by giving heed to conflicting theories?

Do not read religious books which tell you that the world is soon
coming to an end; and do not read the writings of muck-rakers and
pessimistic philosophers who tell you that it is going to the devil.

The world is not going to the devil; it is going to God.

It is a wonderful Becoming.

True, there may be a good many things in existing conditions which
are disagreeable; but what is the use of studying them when they are
certainly passing away, and when the study of them only tends to check
their passing and keep them with us? Why give time and attention to
things which are being removed by evolutionary growth, when you can
hasten their removal only by promoting the evolutionary growth as far
as your part of it goes?

No matter how horrible in seeming may be the conditions in certain
countries, sections, or places, you waste your time and destroy your
own chances by considering them.

You should interest yourself in the world’s becoming rich.

Think of the riches the world is coming into, instead of the poverty it
is growing out of; and bear in mind that the only way in which you can
assist the world in growing rich is by growing rich yourself through
the creative method--not the competitive one.

Give your attention wholly to riches; ignore poverty.

Whenever you think or speak of those who are poor, think and speak
of them as those who are becoming rich; as those who are to be
congratulated rather than pitied. Then they and others will catch the
inspiration, and begin to search for the way out.

Because I say that you are to give your whole time and mind and
thought to riches, it does not follow that you are to be sordid or
mean.

To become really rich is the noblest aim you can have in life, for it
includes everything else.

On the competitive plane, the struggle to get rich is a Godless
scramble for power over other men; but when we come into the creative
mind, all this is changed.

All that is possible in the way of greatness and soul unfoldment, of
service and lofty endeavor, comes by way of getting rich; all is made
possible by the use of things.

If you lack for physical health, you will find that the attainment of
it is conditional on your getting rich.

Only those who are emancipated from financial worry, and who have the
means to live a care-free existence and follow hygienic practices, can
have and retain health.

Moral and spiritual greatness is possible only to those who are above
the competitive battle for existence; and only those who are becoming
rich on the plane of creative thought are free from the degrading
influences of competition. If your heart is set on domestic happiness,
remember that love flourishes best where there is refinement, a high
level of thought, and freedom from corrupting influences; and these are
to be found only where riches are attained by the exercise of creative
thought, without strife or rivalry.

You can aim at nothing so great or noble, I repeat, as to become rich;
and you must fix your attention upon your mental picture of riches, to
the exclusion of all that may tend to dim or obscure the vision.

You must learn to see the underlying TRUTH in all things; you must see
beneath all seemingly wrong conditions the Great One Life ever moving
forward toward fuller expression and more complete happiness.

It is the truth that there is no such thing as poverty; that there is
only wealth.

Some people remain in poverty because they are ignorant of the fact
that there is wealth for them; and these can best be taught by showing
them the way to affluence in your own person and practice.

Others are poor because, while they feel that there is a way out,
they are too intellectually indolent to put forth the mental effort
necessary to find that way and travel it; and for these the very
best thing you can do is to arouse their desire by showing them the
happiness that comes from being rightly rich.

Others still are poor because, while they have some notion of science,
they have become so swamped and lost in the maze of metaphysical and
occult theories that they do not know which road to take. They try a
mixture of many systems and fail in all. For these, again, the very
best thing to do is to show the right way in your own person and
practice; an ounce of doing things is worth a pound of theorizing.

The very best thing you can do for the whole world is to make the most
of yourself.

You can serve God and man in no more effective way than by getting
rich; that is, if you get rich by the creative method, and not by the
competitive one.

Another thing. We assert that this book gives in detail the
principles of the science of getting rich; and if that is true, you
do not need to read any other book upon the subject. This may sound
narrow and egotistical, but consider: there is no more scientific
method of computation in mathematics than by addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division; no other method is possible. There can be
but one shortest distance between two points. There is only one way to
think scientifically, and that is to think in the way that leads by the
most direct and simple route to the goal. No man has yet formulated a
briefer or less complex “system” than the one set forth herein; it has
been stripped of all non-essentials. When you commence on this, lay all
others aside; put them out of your mind altogether.

Read this book every day; keep it with you; commit it to memory, and do
not think about other “systems” and theories. If you do, you will begin
to have doubts, and to be uncertain and wavering in your thought; and
then you will begin to make failures.

After you have made good and become rich, you may study other systems
as much as you please; but until you are quite sure that you have
gained what you want, do not read anything on this line but this book,
unless it be the authors mentioned in the Preface.

And read only the most optimistic comments on the world’s news; those
in harmony with your picture.

Also, postpone your investigations into the occult. Do not dabble in
Theosophy, Spiritualism, or kindred studies. It is very likely that the
dead still live, and are near; but if they are, let them alone; mind
your own business.

Wherever the spirits of the dead may be, they have their own work to
do, and their own problems to solve; and we have no right to interfere
with them. We cannot help them, and it is very doubtful whether they
can help us, or whether we have any right to trespass upon their time
if they can. Let the dead and the hereafter alone, and solve your own
problem; get rich. If you begin to mix with the occult, you will start
mental cross-currents which will surely bring your hopes to shipwreck.
Now, this and the preceding chapters have brought us to the following
statement of basic facts:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

_In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the
creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he
wants, and hold this picture in his thoughts with the fixed PURPOSE to
get what he wants, and the unwavering FAITH that he does get what he
wants, closing his mind against all that may tend to shake his purpose,
dim his vision, or quench his faith._

And in addition to all this, we shall now see that he must live and act
in a Certain Way.




CHAPTER XI. ACTING IN THE CERTAIN WAY.


Thought is the creative power, or the impelling force which causes the
creative power to act; thinking in a Certain Way will bring riches to
you, but you must not rely upon thought alone, paying no attention to
personal action. That is the rock upon which many otherwise scientific
metaphysical thinkers meet shipwreck--the failure to connect thought
with personal action.

We have not yet reached the stage of development, even supposing such
a stage to be possible, in which man can create directly from Formless
Substance without nature’s processes or the work of human hands; man
must not only think, but his personal action must supplement his
thought.

By thought you can cause the gold in the hearts of the mountains to be
impelled toward you; but it will not mine itself, refine itself, coin
itself into double eagles, and come rolling along the roads seeking its
way into your pocket.

Under the impelling power of the Supreme Spirit, men’s affairs will be
so ordered that some one will be led to mine the gold for you; other
men’s business transactions will be so directed that the gold will be
brought toward you, and you must so arrange your own business affairs
that you may be able to receive it when it comes to you. Your thought
makes all things, animate and inanimate, work to bring you what you
want; but your personal activity must be such that you can rightly
receive what you want when it reaches you. You are not to take it as
charity, nor to steal it; you must give every man more in use value
than he gives you in cash value.

The scientific use of thought consists in forming a clear and distinct
mental image of what you want; in holding fast to the purpose to get
what you want; and in realizing with grateful faith that you _do_ get
what you want.

Do not try to “project” your thought in any mysterious or occult way,
with the idea of having it go out and do things for you; that is wasted
effort, and will weaken your power to think with sanity.

The action of thought in getting rich is fully explained in the
preceding chapters; your faith and purpose positively impress your
vision upon Formless Substance, which has THE SAME DESIRE FOR MORE
LIFE THAT YOU HAVE; and this vision, received from you, sets all the
creative forces at work IN AND THROUGH THEIR REGULAR CHANNELS OF
ACTION, but directed toward you.

It is not your part to guide or supervise the creative process; all you
have to do with that is to retain your vision, stick to your purpose,
and maintain your faith and gratitude.

But you must act in a Certain Way, so that you can appropriate what is
yours when it comes to you; so that you can meet the things you have in
your picture, and put them in their proper places as they arrive.

You can readily see the truth of this. When things reach you, they will
be in the hands of other men, who will ask an equivalent for them.

And you can only get what is yours by giving the other man what is his.

Your pocketbook is not going to be transformed into a Fortunatus’s
purse, which shall be always full of money without effort on your part.

This is the crucial point in the science of getting rich; right here,
where thought and personal action must be combined. There are very
many people who, consciously or unconsciously, set the creative forces
in action by the strength and persistence of their desires, but who
remain poor because they do not provide for the reception of the thing
they want when it comes.

By thought, the thing you want is brought to you; by action you receive
it.

Whatever your action is to be, it is evident that you must act NOW. You
cannot act in the past, and it is essential to the clearness of your
mental vision that you dismiss the past from your mind. You cannot act
in the future, for the future is not here yet. And you cannot tell how
you will want to act in any future contingency until that contingency
has arrived.

Because you are not in the right business, or the right environment
now, do not think that you must postpone action until you get into the
right business or environment. And do not spend time in the present
taking thought as to the best course in possible future emergencies;
have faith in your ability to meet any emergency when it arrives.

If you act in the present with your mind on the future, your present
action will be with a divided mind, and will not be effective.

Put your whole mind into present action.

Do not give your creative impulse to Original Substance, and then sit
down and wait for results; if you do, you will never get them. Act now.
There is never any time but now, and there never will be any time but
now. If you are ever to begin to make ready for the reception of what
you want, you must begin now.

And your action, whatever it is, must most likely be in your present
business or employment, and must be upon the persons and things in your
present environment.

You cannot act where you are not; you cannot act where you have been,
and you cannot act where you are going to be; you can act only where
you are.

Do not bother as to whether yesterday’s work was well done or ill
done; do to-day’s work well.

Do not try to do to-morrow’s work now; there will be plenty of time to
do that when you get to it.

Do not try, by occult or mystical means, to act on people or things
that are out of your reach.

Do not wait for a change of environment before you act; get a change of
environment by action.

You can so act upon the environment in which you are now, as to cause
yourself to be transferred to a better environment.

Hold with faith and purpose the vision of yourself in the better
environment, but act upon your present environment with all your heart,
and with all your strength, and with all your mind.

Do not spend any time in day dreaming or castle building; hold to the
one vision of what you want, and act NOW.

Do not cast about seeking some new thing to do, or some strange,
unusual, or remarkable action to perform as a first step toward getting
rich. It is probable that your actions, at least for some time to come,
will be those you have been performing for some time past; but you are
to begin now to perform these actions in the Certain Way, which will
surely make you rich.

If you are engaged in some business, and feel that it is not the right
one for you, do not wait until you get into the right business before
you begin to act.

Do not feel discouraged, or sit down and lament because you are
misplaced. No man was ever so misplaced but that he could find the
right place, and no man ever became so involved in the wrong business
but that he could get into the right business.

Hold the vision of yourself in the right business, with the purpose to
get into it, and the faith that you will get into it, and are getting
into it; but ACT in your present business. Use your present business
as the means of getting a better one, and use your present environment
as the means of getting into a better one. Your vision of the right
business, if held with faith and purpose, will cause the Supreme to
move the right business toward you; and your action, if performed in
the Certain Way, will cause you to move toward the business.

If you are an employee, or wage earner, and feel that you must change
places in order to get what you want, do not “project” your thought
into space and rely upon it to get you another job. It will probably
fail to do so.

Hold the vision of yourself in the job you want, while you ACT with
faith and purpose on the job you have, and you will certainly get the
job you want.

Your vision and faith will set the creative force in motion to bring
it toward you, and your action will cause the forces in your own
environment to move you toward the place you want. In closing this
chapter, we will add another statement to our syllabus:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thoughts
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

_In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the
creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he
wants, and hold this picture in his thoughts with the fixed PURPOSE to
get what he wants, and the unwavering FAITH that he does get what he
wants, closing his mind to all that may tend to shake his purpose, dim
his vision, or quench his faith._

_That he may receive what he wants when it comes, man must act NOW
upon the people and things in his present environment._




CHAPTER XII. EFFICIENT ACTION.


You must use your thought as directed in previous chapters, and begin
to do what you can do where you are; and you must do ALL that you can
do where you are.

You can advance only by being larger than your present place; and no
man is larger than his present place who leaves undone any of the work
pertaining to that place.

The world is advanced only by those who more than fill their present
places.

If no man quite filled his present place, you can see that there must
be a going backward in everything. Those who do not quite fill their
present places are a dead weight upon society, government, commerce,
and industry; they must be carried along by others at a great expense.
The progress of the world is retarded only by those who do not fill the
places they are holding; they belong to a former age and a lower stage
or plane of life, and their tendency is toward degeneration. No society
could advance if every man was smaller than his place; social evolution
is guided by the law of physical and mental evolution. In the animal
world, evolution is caused by excess of life.

When an organism has more life than can be expressed in the functions
of its own plane, it develops the organs of a higher plane, and a new
species is originated.

There never would have been new species had there not been organisms
which more than filled their places. The law is exactly the same for
you; your getting rich depends upon your applying this principle to
your own affairs.

Every day is either a successful day or a day of failure; and it is
the successful days which get you what you want. If every day is a
failure, you can never get rich; while if every day is a success, you
cannot fail to get rich.

If there is something that may be done to-day, and you do not do
it, you have failed in so far as that thing is concerned; and the
consequences may be more disastrous than you imagine.

You cannot foresee the results of even the most trivial act; you do not
know the workings of all the forces that have been set moving in your
behalf. Much may be depending on your doing some simple act; it may be
the very thing which is to open the door of opportunity to very great
possibilities. You can never know all the combinations which Supreme
Intelligence is making for you in the world of things and of human
affairs; your neglect or failure to do some small thing may cause a
long delay in getting what you want.

Do, every day, ALL that can be done that day.

There is, however, a limitation or qualification of the above that you
must take into account.

You are not to overwork, nor to rush blindly into your business in the
effort to do the greatest possible number of things in the shortest
possible time.

You are not to try to do to-morrow’s work to-day, nor to do a week’s
work in a day.

_It is really not the number of things you do, but the EFFICIENCY of
each separate action that counts._

Every act is, in itself, either a success or a failure.

Every act is, in itself, either effective or inefficient.

Every inefficient act is a failure, and if you spend your life in doing
inefficient acts, your whole life will be a failure.

The more things you do, the worse for you, if all your acts are
inefficient ones.

On the other hand, every efficient act is a success in itself, and if
every act of your life is an efficient one, your whole life MUST be a
success.

The cause of failure is doing too many things in an inefficient manner,
and not doing enough things in an efficient manner.

You will see that it is a self-evident proposition that if you do not
do any inefficient acts, and if you do a sufficient number of efficient
acts, you will become rich. If, now, it is possible for you to make
each act an efficient one, you see again that the getting of riches is
reduced to an exact science, like mathematics.

The matter turns, then, on the question whether you can make each
separate act a success in itself. And this you can certainly do.

You can make each act a success, because All Power is working with you;
and All Power cannot fail.

Power is at your service; and to make each act efficient you have only
to put power into it.

Every action is either strong or weak; and when every one is strong,
you are acting in the Certain Way which will make you rich.

Every act can be made strong and efficient by holding your vision while
you are doing it, and putting the whole power of your FAITH and PURPOSE
into it.

It is at this point that the people fail who separate mental power from
personal action. They use the power of mind in one place and at one
time, and they act in another place and at another time. So their acts
are not successful in themselves; too many of them are inefficient.
But if All Power goes into every act, no matter how commonplace, every
act will be a success in itself; and as in the nature of things every
success opens the way to other successes, your progress toward what
you want, and the progress of what you want toward you, will become
increasingly rapid.

Remember that successful action is cumulative in its results. Since the
desire for more life is inherent in all things, when a man begins to
move toward larger life more things attach themselves to him, and the
influence of his desire is multiplied.

Do, every day, all that you can do that day, and do each act in an
efficient manner.

In saying that you must hold your vision while you are doing each
act, however trivial or commonplace, I do not mean to say that it is
necessary at all times to see the vision distinctly to its smallest
details. It should be the work of your leisure hours to use your
imagination on the details of your vision, and to contemplate them
until they are firmly fixed upon your memory.

If you wish speedy results, spend practically all your spare time in
this practice.

By continuous contemplation you will get the picture of what you
want, even to the smallest details, so firmly fixed upon your mind,
and so completely transferred to the mind of Formless Substance, that
in your working hours you need only to mentally refer to the picture
to stimulate your faith and purpose, and cause your best effort to be
put forth. Contemplate your picture in your leisure hours until your
consciousness is so full of it that you can grasp it instantly. You
will become so enthused with its bright promises that the mere thought
of it will call forth the strongest energies of your whole being.

Let us again repeat our syllabus, and by slightly changing the closing
statements bring it to the point we have now reached.

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by
the thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

_In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the
creative mind; he must form a clear mental picture of the things he
wants, and do, with faith and purpose, all that can be done each day,
doing each separate thing in an efficient manner._




CHAPTER XIII. GETTING INTO THE RIGHT BUSINESS.


Success, in any particular business, depends for one thing upon your
possessing in a well-developed state the faculties required in that
business.

Without good musical faculty no one can succeed as a teacher of
music; without well-developed mechanical faculties no one can achieve
great success in any of the mechanical trades; without tact and the
commercial faculties no one can succeed in mercantile pursuits.
But to possess in a well-developed state the faculties required in
your particular vocation does not insure getting rich. There are
musicians who have remarkable talent, and who yet remain poor; there
are blacksmiths, carpenters, and so on who have excellent mechanical
ability, but who do not get rich; and there are merchants with good
faculties for dealing with men who nevertheless fail.

The different faculties are tools; it is essential to have good tools,
but it is also essential that the tools should be used in the Right
Way. One man can take a sharp saw, a square, a good plane, and so on,
and build a handsome article of furniture; another man can take the
same tools and set to work to duplicate the article, but his production
will be a botch. He does not know how to use good tools in a successful
way.

The various faculties of your mind are the tools with which you must
do the work which is to make you rich; it will be easier for you to
succeed if you get into a business for which you are well equipped with
mental tools.

Generally speaking, you will do best in that business which will use
your strongest faculties; the one for which you are naturally “best
fitted.” But there are limitations to this statement, also. No man
should regard his vocation as being irrevocably fixed by the tendencies
with which he was born.

You can get rich in ANY business, for if you have not the right talent
for it you can develop that talent; it merely means that you will have
to make your tools as you go along, instead of confining yourself to
the use of those with which you were born. It will be EASIER for you
to succeed in a vocation for which you already have the talents in a
well-developed state; but you CAN succeed in any vocation, for you can
develop any rudimentary talent, and there is no talent of which you
have not at least the rudiment.

You will get rich most easily in point of effort, if you do that for
which you are best fitted; but you will get rich most satisfactorily if
you do that which you WANT to do.

Doing what you want to do is life; and there is no real satisfaction in
living if we are compelled to be forever doing something which we do
not like to do, and can never do what we want to do. And it is certain
that you can do what you want to do; the desire to do it is proof that
you have within you the power which can do it.

Desire is a manifestation of power.

The desire to play music is the power which can play music seeking
expression and development; the desire to invent mechanical devices is
the mechanical talent seeking expression and development.

Where there is no power, either developed or undeveloped, to do a
thing, there is never any desire to do that thing; and where there is
strong desire to do a thing, it is certain proof that the power to do
it is strong, and only requires to be developed and applied in the
Right Way.

All things else being equal, it is best to select the business for
which you have the best developed talent; but if you have a strong
desire to engage in any particular line of work, you should select that
work as the ultimate end at which you aim.

You can do what you want to do, and it is your right and privilege
to follow the business or avocation which will be most congenial and
pleasant.

You are not obliged to do what you do not like to do, and should not do
it except as a means to bring you to the doing of the thing you want to
do.

If there are past mistakes whose consequences have placed you in an
undesirable business or environment, you may be obliged for some time
to do what you do not like to do; but you can make the doing of it
pleasant by knowing that it is making it possible for you to come to
the doing of what you want to do.

If you feel that you are not in the right vocation, do not act too
hastily in trying to get into another one. The best way, generally, to
change business or environment is by growth.

Do not be afraid to make a sudden and radical change if the opportunity
is presented, and you feel after careful consideration that it is the
right opportunity; but never take sudden or radical action when you are
in doubt as to the wisdom of doing so.

There is never any hurry on the creative plane; and there is no lack of
opportunity.

When you get out of the competitive mind you will understand that you
never need to act hastily. No one else is going to beat you to the
thing you want to do; there is enough for all. If one place is taken,
another and a better one will be opened for you a little farther on;
there is plenty of time. When you are in doubt, wait. Fall back on the
contemplation of your vision, and increase your faith and purpose; and
by all means, in times of doubt and indecision, cultivate gratitude.

A day or two spent in contemplating the vision of what you want, and
in earnest thanksgiving that you are getting it, will bring your mind
into such close relationship with the Supreme that you will make no
mistake when you do act.

There is a mind which knows all there is to know; and you can come into
close unity with this mind by faith and the purpose to advance in life,
if you have deep gratitude.

Mistakes come from acting hastily, or from acting in fear or doubt, or
in forgetfulness of the Right Motive, which is more life to all, and
less to none.

As you go on in the Certain Way, opportunities will come to you in
increasing number; and you will need to be very steady in your faith
and purpose, and to keep in close touch with the All Mind by reverent
gratitude.

Do all that you can do in a perfect manner every day, but do it without
haste, worry, or fear. Go as fast as you can, but never hurry.

Remember that in the moment you begin to hurry you cease to be a
creator and become a competitor; you drop back upon the old plane again.

Whenever you find yourself hurrying, call a halt; fix your attention
on the mental image of the thing you want, and begin to give thanks
that you are getting it. The exercise of GRATITUDE will never fail to
strengthen your faith and renew your purpose.




CHAPTER XIV. THE IMPRESSION OF INCREASE.


Whether you change your vocation or not, your actions for the present
must be those pertaining to the business in which you are now engaged.

You can get into the business you want by making constructive use of
the business you are already established in; by doing your daily work
in a Certain Way.

And in so far as your business consists in dealing with other men,
whether personally or by letter, the key-thought of all your efforts
must be to convey to their minds the impression of increase.

Increase is what all men and all women are seeking; it is the urge of
the Formless Intelligence within them, seeking fuller expression.

The desire for increase is inherent in all nature; it is the
fundamental impulse of the universe. All human activities are based on
the desire for increase; people are seeking more food, more clothes,
better shelter, more luxury, more beauty, more knowledge, more
pleasure--increase in something, more life.

Every living thing is under this necessity for continuous advancement;
where increase of life ceases, dissolution and death set in at once.

Man instinctively knows this, and hence he is forever seeking more.
This law of perpetual increase is set forth by Jesus in the parable of
the talents; only those who gain more retain any; from him who hath not
shall be taken away even that which he hath.

The normal desire for increased wealth is not an evil or a
reprehensible thing; it is simply the desire for more abundant life; it
is aspiration.

And because it is the deepest instinct of their natures, all men and
women are attracted to him who can give them more of the means of life.

In following the Certain Way as described in the foregoing pages, you
are getting continuous increase for yourself, and you are giving it to
all with whom you deal.

You are a creative center, from which increase is given off to all.

Be sure of this, and convey assurance of the fact to every man, woman,
and child with whom you come in contact. No matter how small the
transaction, even if it be only the selling of a stick of candy to a
little child, put into it the thought of increase, and make sure that
the customer is impressed with the thought.

Convey the impression of advancement with everything you do, so that
all people shall receive the impression that you are an Advancing Man,
and that you advance all who deal with you. Even to the people whom you
meet in a social way, without any thought of business, and to whom you
do not try to sell anything, give the thought of increase.

You can convey this impression by holding the unshakable faith that
you, yourself, are in the Way of Increase; and by letting this faith
inspire, fill, and permeate every action.

Do everything that you do in the firm conviction that you are an
advancing personality, and that you are giving advancement to everybody.

Feel that you are getting rich, and that in so doing you are making
others rich, and conferring benefits on all.

Do not boast or brag of your success, or talk about it unnecessarily;
true faith is never boastful.

Wherever you find a boastful person, you find one who is secretly
doubtful and afraid. Simply feel the faith, and let it work out in
every transaction; let every act and tone and look express the quiet
assurance that you are getting rich; that you are already rich. Words
will not be necessary to communicate this feeling to others; they will
feel the sense of increase when in your presence, and will be attracted
to you again.

You must so impress others that they will feel that in associating with
you they will get increase for themselves. See that you give them a use
value greater than the cash value you are taking from them.

Take an honest pride in doing this, and let everybody know it; and you
will have no lack of customers. People will go where they are given
increase; and the Supreme, which desires increase in all, and which
knows all, will move toward you men and women who have never heard of
you. Your business will increase rapidly, and you will be surprised at
the unexpected benefits which will come to you. You will be able from
day to day to make larger combinations, secure greater advantages, and
to go on into a more congenial vocation if you desire to do so.

But in doing all this, you must never lose sight of your vision of what
you want, or your faith and purpose to get what you want.

Let me here give you another word of caution in regard to motives.

_Beware of the insidious temptation to seek for power over other men._

Nothing is so pleasant to the unformed or partially developed mind as
the exercise of power or dominion over others. The desire to rule for
selfish gratification has been the curse of the world. For countless
ages kings and lords have drenched the earth with blood in their
battles to extend their dominions; this not to seek more life for all,
but to get more power for themselves.

To-day, the main motive in the business and industrial world is the
same; men marshal their armies of dollars, and lay waste the lives and
hearts of millions in the same mad scramble for power over others.
Commercial kings, like political kings, are inspired by the lust for
power.

Jesus saw in this desire for mastery the moving impulse of that
evil world He sought to overthrow. Read the twenty-third chapter of
Matthew, and see how He pictures the lust of the Pharisees to be
called “Master,” to sit in the high places, to domineer over others,
and to lay burdens on the backs of the less fortunate; and note how
He compares this lust for dominion with the brotherly seeking for the
Common Good to which He calls His disciples.

Look out for the temptation to seek for authority, to become a
“master,” to be considered as one who is above the common herd, to
impress others by lavish display, and so on.

The mind that seeks for mastery over others is the competitive mind;
and the competitive mind is not the creative one. In order to master
your environment and your destiny, it is not at all necessary that you
should rule over your fellow men; and indeed, when you fall into the
world’s struggle for the high places, you begin to be conquered by fate
and environment, and your getting rich becomes a matter of chance and
speculation.

Beware of the competitive mind! No better statement of the principle of
creative action can be formulated than the favorite declaration of the
late “Golden Rule” Jones of Toledo: “What I want for myself, I want for
everybody.”




CHAPTER XV. THE ADVANCING MAN.


What I have said in the last chapter applies as well to the
professional man and the wage-earner as to the man who is engaged in
mercantile business.

No matter whether you are a physician, a teacher, or a clergyman, if
you can give increase of life to others and make them sensible of
the fact, they will be attracted to you, and you will get rich. The
physician who holds the vision of himself as a great and successful
healer, and who works toward the complete realization of that vision
with faith and purpose, as described in former chapters, will come into
such close touch with the Source of Life that he will be phenomenally
successful; patients will come to him in throngs.

No one has a greater opportunity to carry into effect the teachings
of this book than the practitioner of medicine; it does not matter
to which of the various schools he may belong, for the principle of
healing is common to all of them, and may be reached by all alike. The
Advancing Man in medicine, who holds to a clear mental image of himself
as successful, and who obeys the laws of faith, purpose, and gratitude,
will cure every curable case he undertakes, no matter what remedies he
may use.

In the field of religion, the world cries out for the clergyman who
can teach his hearers the true science of abundant life. He who
masters the details of the science of getting rich, together with the
allied sciences of being well, of being great, and of winning love,
and who teaches these details from the pulpit, will never lack for a
congregation. This is the gospel that the world needs; it will give
increase of life, and men will hear it gladly, and will give liberal
support to the man who brings it to them.

What is now needed is a demonstration of the science of life from
the pulpit. We want preachers who can not only tell us how, but who
in their own persons will show us how. We need the preacher who will
himself be rich, healthy, great, and beloved, to teach us how to attain
to these things; and when he comes he will find a numerous and loyal
following.

The same is true of the teacher who can inspire the children with the
faith and purpose of the advancing life. He will never be “out of a
job.” And any teacher who has this faith and purpose can give it to his
pupils; he cannot help giving it to them if it is part of his own life
and practice.

What is true of the teacher, preacher, and physician is true of the
lawyer, dentist, real estate man, insurance agent--of everybody.

The combined mental and personal action I have described is infallible;
it cannot fail. Every man and woman who follows these instructions
steadily, perseveringly, and to the letter, will get rich. The law of
the Increase of Life is as mathematically certain in its operation as
the law of gravitation; getting rich is an exact science.

The wage-earner will find this as true of his case as of any of the
others mentioned. Do not feel that you have no chance to get rich
because you are working where there is no visible opportunity for
advancement, where wages are small and the cost of living high. Form
your clear mental vision of what you want, and begin to act with faith
and purpose.

Do all the work you can do, every day, and do each piece of work in a
perfectly successful manner; put the power of success, and the purpose
to get rich, into everything that you do.

But do not do this merely with the idea of currying favor with your
employer, in the hope that he, or those above you, will see your good
work and advance you; it is not likely that they will do so.

The man who is merely a “good” workman, filling his place to the very
best of his ability, and satisfied with that, is valuable to his
employer; and it is not to the employer’s interest to promote him; he
is worth more where he is.

To secure advancement, something more is necessary than to be too large
for your place.

The man who is certain to advance is the one who is too big for his
place, and who has a clear concept of what he wants to be; who knows
that he can become what he wants to be, and who is determined to BE
what he wants to be.

Do not try to more than fill your present place with a view to pleasing
your employer; do it with the idea of advancing yourself. Hold the
faith and purpose of increase during work hours, after work hours,
and before work hours. Hold it in such a way that every person who
comes in contact with you, whether foreman, fellow workman, or social
acquaintance, will feel the power of purpose radiating from you; so
that every one will get the sense of advancement and increase from
you. Men will be attracted to you, and if there is no possibility for
advancement in your present job, you will very soon see an opportunity
to take another job.

There is a Power which never fails to present opportunity to the
Advancing Man who is moving in obedience to law.

God cannot help helping you, if you act in a Certain Way; He must do so
in order to help Himself.

There is nothing in your circumstances or in the industrial situation
that can keep you down. If you cannot get rich working for the steel
trust, you can get rich on a ten-acre farm; and if you begin to move
in the Certain Way, you will certainly escape from the “clutches” of
the steel trust and get on to the farm or wherever else you wish to be.

If a few thousands of its employees would enter upon the Certain Way,
the steel trust would soon be in a bad plight; it would have to give
its workingmen more opportunity, or go out of business. Nobody has
to work for a trust; the trusts can keep men in so-called hopeless
conditions only so long as there are men who are too ignorant to know
of the science of getting rich, or too intellectually slothful to
practice it.

Begin this way of thinking and acting, and your faith and purpose will
make you quick to see any opportunity to better your condition.

Such opportunities will speedily come, for the Supreme, working in All,
and working for you, will bring them before you.

Do not wait for an opportunity to be all that you want to be; when
an opportunity to be more than you are now is presented and you feel
impelled toward it, take it. It will be the first step toward a greater
opportunity.

There is no such thing possible in this universe as a lack of
opportunities for the man who is living the advancing life.

It is inherent in the constitution of the cosmos that all things shall
be for him and work together for his good; and he must certainly get
rich if he acts and thinks in the Certain Way. So let wage-earning men
and women study this book with great care, and enter with confidence
upon the course of action it prescribes; it will not fail.




CHAPTER XVI. SOME CAUTIONS, AND CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.


Many people will scoff at the idea that there is an exact science of
getting rich; holding the impression that the supply of wealth is
limited, they will insist that social and governmental institutions
must be changed before even any considerable number of people can
acquire a competence.

But this is not true.

It is true that existing governments keep the masses in poverty, but
this is because the masses do not think and act in the Certain Way.

If the masses begin to move forward as suggested in this book, neither
governments nor industrial systems can check them; all systems must be
modified to accommodate the forward movement.

If the people have the Advancing Mind, have the Faith that they can
become rich, and move forward with the fixed purpose to become rich,
nothing can possibly keep them in poverty.

Individuals may enter upon the Certain Way at any time, and under any
government, and make themselves rich; and when any considerable number
of individuals do so under any government, they will cause the system
to be so modified as to open the way for others.

The more men who get rich on the competitive plane, the worse for
others; the more who get rich on the creative plane, the better for
others.

The economic salvation of the masses can only be accomplished by
getting a large number of people to practice the scientific method set
down in this book, and become rich. These will show others the way, and
inspire them with a desire for real life, with the faith that it can
be attained, and with the purpose to attain it.

For the present, however, it is enough to know that neither the
government under which you live nor the capitalistic or competitive
system of industry can keep you from getting rich. When you enter upon
the creative plane of thought you will rise above all these things and
become a citizen of another kingdom.

But remember that your thought must be held upon the creative plane;
you are never for an instant to be betrayed into regarding the supply
as limited, or into acting on the moral level of competition.

Whenever you do fall into old ways of thought, correct yourself
instantly; for when you are in the competitive mind, you have lost the
co-operation of the Mind of the Whole.

Do not spend any time in planning as to how you will meet possible
emergencies in the future, except as the necessary policies may affect
your actions to-day. You are concerned with doing to-day’s work in a
perfectly successful manner, and not with emergencies which may arise
to-morrow; you can attend to them as they come.

Do not concern yourself with questions as to how you shall surmount
obstacles which may loom upon your business horizon, unless you can see
plainly that your course must be altered to-day in order to avoid them.

No matter how tremendous an obstruction may appear at a distance, you
will find that if you go on in the Certain Way it will disappear as you
approach it, or that a way over, through, or around it will appear.

No possible combination of circumstances can defeat a man or woman who
is proceeding to get rich along strictly scientific lines. No man or
woman who obeys the law can fail to get rich, any more than one can
multiply two by two and fail to get four.

Give no anxious thought to possible disasters, obstacles, panics, or
unfavorable combinations of circumstances; it is time enough to meet
such things when they present themselves before you in the immediate
present, and you will find that every difficulty carries with it the
wherewithal for its overcoming.

Guard your speech. Never speak of yourself, your affairs, or of
anything else in a discouraged or discouraging way.

Never admit the possibility of failure, or speak in a way that infers
failure as a possibility.

Never speak of the times as being hard, or of business conditions as
being doubtful. Times may be hard and business doubtful for those who
are on the competitive plane, but they can never be so for you; you can
create what you want, and you are above fear.

When others are having hard times and poor business, you will find
your greatest opportunities.

Train yourself to think of and to look upon the world as a something
which is Becoming, which is growing; and to regard seeming evil
as being only that which is undeveloped. Always speak in terms of
advancement; to do otherwise is to deny your faith, and to deny your
faith is to lose it.

Never allow yourself to feel disappointed. You may expect to have a
certain thing at a certain time, and not get it at that time; and this
will appear to you like failure.

But if you hold to your faith you will find that the failure is only
apparent.

Go on in the certain way, and if you do not receive that thing, you
will receive something so much better that you will see that the
seeming failure was really a great success.

A student of this science had set his mind on making a certain business
combination which seemed to him at the time to be very desirable,
and he worked for some weeks to bring it about. When the crucial time
came, the thing failed in a perfectly inexplicable way; it was as if
some unseen influence had been working secretly against him. He was not
disappointed; on the contrary, he thanked God that his desire had been
overruled, and went steadily on with a grateful mind. In a few weeks an
opportunity so much better came his way that he would not have made the
first deal on any account; and he saw that a Mind which knew more than
he knew had prevented him from losing the greater good by entangling
himself with the lesser.

That is the way every seeming failure will work out for you, if you
keep your faith, hold to your purpose, have gratitude, and do, every
day, all that can be done that day, doing each separate act in a
successful manner.

_When you make a failure, it is because you have not asked for enough;
keep on, and a larger thing than you were seeking will certainly come
to you._ Remember this.

You will not fail because you lack the necessary talent to do what you
wish to do. If you go on as I have directed, you will develop all the
talent that is necessary to the doing of your work.

It is not within the scope of this book to deal with the science of
cultivating talent; but it is as certain and simple as the process of
getting rich.

However, do not hesitate or waver for fear that when you come to any
certain place you will fail for lack of ability; keep right on, and
when you come to that place, the ability will be furnished to you. The
same source of Ability which enabled the untaught Lincoln to do the
greatest work in government ever accomplished by a single man is open
to you; you may draw upon all the mind there is for wisdom to use in
meeting the responsibilities which are laid upon you. Go on in full
faith.

Study this book. Make it your constant companion until you have
mastered all the ideas contained in it. While you are getting firmly
established in this faith, you will do well to give up most recreations
and pleasures; and to stay away from places where ideas conflicting
with these are advanced in lectures or sermons. Do not read pessimistic
or conflicting literature, or get into arguments upon the matter. Do
very little reading, outside of the writers mentioned in the Preface.
Spend most of your leisure time in contemplating your vision, and in
cultivating gratitude, and in reading this book. It contains all you
need to know of the science of getting rich; and you will find all the
essentials summed up in the following chapter.




CHAPTER XVII. SUMMARY OF THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which, in
its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces of
the universe.

A thought in this substance produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought.

Man can form things in his thought, and by impressing his thought upon
formless substance can cause the thing he thinks about to be created.

In order to do this, man must pass from the competitive to the creative
mind; otherwise he cannot be in harmony with the Formless Intelligence,
which is always creative and never competitive in spirit.

Man may come into full harmony with the Formless Substance by
entertaining a lively and sincere gratitude for the blessings
it bestows upon him. Gratitude unifies the mind of man with the
intelligence of Substance, so that man’s thoughts are received by
the Formless. Man can remain upon the creative plane only by uniting
himself with the Formless Intelligence through a deep and continuous
feeling of gratitude.

Man must form a clear and definite mental image of the things he wishes
to have, to do, or to become; and he must hold this mental image in
his thoughts, while being deeply grateful to the Supreme that all
his desires are granted to him. The man who wishes to get rich must
spend his leisure hours in contemplating his Vision, and in earnest
thanksgiving that the reality is being given to him. Too much stress
cannot be laid on the importance of frequent contemplation of the
mental image, coupled with unwavering faith and devout gratitude. This
is the process by which the impression is given to the Formless, and
the creative forces set in motion.

The creative energy works through the established channels of natural
growth, and of the industrial and social order. All that is included
in his mental image will surely be brought to the man who follows the
instructions given above, and whose faith does not waver. What he wants
will come to him through the ways of established trade and commerce.

In order to receive his own when it shall come to him, man must be
active; and this activity can only consist in more than filling his
present place. He must keep in mind the Purpose to get rich through
the realization of his mental image. And he must do, every day, all
that can be done that day, taking care to do each act in a successful
manner. He must give to every man a use value in excess of the cash
value he receives, so that each transaction makes for more life; and
he must so hold the Advancing Thought that the impression of Increase
will be communicated to all with whom he comes in contact.

The men and women who practice the foregoing instructions will
certainly get rich; and the riches they receive will be in exact
proportion to the definiteness of their vision, the fixity of their
purpose, the steadiness of their faith, and the depth of their
gratitude.

       *       *       *       *       *

FURTHER AIDS TOWARD GETTING RICH RIGHT

THE NAUTILUS is published monthly for the express purpose of making
Men and Women Who Can Do What They Will To Do. It abounds in practical
ideas and in the bright inspiration that impels you to USE the ideas.
Use it as first aid!

Wallace D. Wattles, who wrote this book, teaches “Constructive Science”
in every number of the magazine. How to think so as to PROMOTE YOURSELF
is what you want to know. He teaches it!

Elizabeth and William E. Towne teach it, too. They are the editors and
owners of THE NAUTILUS, and their success is worth knowing about and
learning from.

And Thomas Dreier, of the Sheldon School of Salesmanship, writes for
NAUTILUS on business growing. So does Frank Andrews Fall, of the
University of New York. And several others. These folks know how. GET
IN TOUCH with success and successful people through NAUTILUS.

Then there is our Success Department, where everybody is invited to say
his say, and prizes are given for best letters.

THE NAUTILUS teaches and inspires health, wealth, and happiness in ALL
departments of life.

Don’t miss Wallace D. Wattles’ great new serial story, “As a Grain of
Mustard Seed,” which will begin in an early number of the magazine.

Send $1.00 for a year’s subscription to THE NAUTILUS, with a copy of
“Making The Man Who Can,” and “Marital Unrest: a New Remedy,” both by
Wallace D. Wattles. Or, send 10 cents for a three months’ trial and a
copy of “Marital Unrest.”

Do you want more books on how to succeed? Read Bruce McClelland’s
“Prosperity Through Thought Force,” price, $1.00, to which Ells Wheeler
Wilcox gave nearly a page of space in the New York Journal; and read
“How to Grow Success,” by Elizabeth Towne, 50c. And don’t you want to
read Wallace D. Wattles’ “New Science of Living and Healing,” price,
50c.? Address

ELIZABETH TOWNE, Dept. TS, HOLYOKE, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication.

The following change has been made:

p. 87: purpose changed to propose (who propose with)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Science of Getting Rich, by Wallace D. Wattles